Title: UK malaria treatment guidelines 2016.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC7132403)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7132403/

J InfectJ Infect3815pheelsevierThe Journal of Infection0163-44531532-2742pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC7132403PMC7132403.1713240371324032688008810.1016/j.jinf.2016.02.001S0163-4453(16)00047-51ArticleUK malaria treatment guidelines 2016LallooDavid G.a∗ShingadiaDelanebBellDavid J.cBeechingNicholas J.aWhittyChristopher J.M.dChiodiniPeter L.efor the PHE Advisory Committee on Malaria Prevention in UK TravellersaDepartment of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Pembroke Place, Liverpool L3 5QA, UKbDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Great Ormond Street Hospital, Great Ormond Street, London WC1N 3JH, UKcDepartment of Infectious Diseases, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Glasgow G51 4TF, UKdHospital for Tropical Diseases, Mortimer Market Centre, Capper Street off Tottenham Court Road, London WC1E 6AU, UKeMalaria Reference Laboratory, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 151 705 3218.620161222016726355366635649622016120220160804202004082024© 2016 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.2016The British Infection AssociationSince January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.1.Malaria is the tropical disease most commonly imported into the UK, with 1300–1800 cases reported each year, and 2–11 deaths.2. Approximately three quarters of reported malaria cases in the UK are caused by Plasmodium falciparum, which is capable of invading a high proportion of red blood cells and rapidly leading to severe or life-threatening multi-organ disease.3. Most non-falciparum malaria cases are caused by Plasmodium vivax; a few cases are caused by the other species of plasmodium: Plasmodium ovale, Plasmodium malariae or Plasmodium knowlesi.4. Mixed infections with more than one species of parasite can occur; they commonly involve P. falciparum with the attendant risks of severe malaria.5. There are no typical clinical features of malaria; even fever is not invariably present. Malaria in children (and sometimes in adults) may present with misleading symptoms such as gastrointestinal features, sore throat or lower respiratory complaints.6. A diagnosis of malaria must always be sought in a feverish or sick child or adult who has visited malaria-endemic areas. Specific country information on malaria can be found at http://travelhealthpro.org.uk/. P. falciparum infection rarely presents more than six months after exposure but presentation of other species can occur more than a year after exposure.7. Management of malaria depends on awareness of the diagnosis and on performing the correct diagnostic tests: the diagnosis cannot be excluded until more than one blood specimen has been examined. Other travel related infections, especially viral haemorrhagic fevers, should also be considered.8. The optimum diagnostic procedure is examination of thick and thin blood films by an expert to detect and speciate the malarial parasites. P. falciparum and P. vivax (depending upon the product) malaria can be diagnosed almost as accurately using rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) which detect plasmodial antigens. RDTs for other Plasmodium species are not as reliable.9. Most patients treated for P. falciparum malaria should be admitted to hospital for at least 24 h as patients can deteriorate suddenly, especially early in the course of treatment. In specialised units seeing large numbers of patients, outpatient treatment may be considered if specific protocols for patient selection and follow up are in place.10. Uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria should be treated with an artemisinin combination therapy (Grade 1A). Artemether–lumefantrine (Riamet®) is the drug of choice (Grade 2C) and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine (Eurartesim®) is an alternative. Quinine or atovaquone–proguanil (Malarone®) can be used if an ACT is not available. Quinine is highly effective but poorly-tolerated in prolonged treatment and should be used in combination with an additional drug, usually oral doxycycline.11. Severe falciparum malaria, or infections complicated by a relatively high parasite count (more than 2% of red blood cells parasitized) should be treated with intravenous therapy until the patient is well enough to continue with oral treatment. Severe malaria is a rare complication of P. vivax or P. knowlesi infection and also requires parenteral therapy.12. The treatment of choice for severe or complicated malaria in adults and children is intravenous artesunate (Grade 1A). Intravenous artesunate is unlicensed in the EU but is available in many centres. The alternative is intravenous quinine, which should be started immediately if artesunate is not available (Grade 1A). Patients treated with intravenous quinine require careful monitoring for hypoglycemia.13. Patients with severe or complicated malaria should be managed in a high-dependency or intensive care environment. They may require haemodynamic support and management of: acute respiratory distress syndrome, disseminated intravascular coagulation, acute kidney injury, seizures, and severe intercurrent infections including Gram-negative bacteraemia/septicaemia.14. Children with severe malaria should also be treated with empirical broad spectrum antibiotics until bacterial infection can be excluded (Grade 1B).15. Haemolysis occurs in approximately 10–15% patients following intravenous artesunate treatment. Haemoglobin concentrations should be checked approximately 14 days following treatment in those treated with IV artemisinins (Grade 2C).16. Falciparum malaria in pregnancy is more likely to be complicated: the placenta contains high levels of parasites, stillbirth or early delivery may occur and diagnosis can be difficult if parasites are concentrated in the placenta and scanty in the blood.17. Uncomplicated falciparum malaria in the second and third trimester of pregnancy should be treated with artemether–lumefantrine (Grade 2B). Uncomplicated falciparum malaria in the first trimester of pregnancy should usually be treated with quinine and clindamycin but specialist advice should be sought. Severe malaria in any trimester of pregnancy should be treated as for any other patient with artesunate preferred over quinine (Grade 1C).18. Children with uncomplicated malaria should be treated with an ACT (artemether–lumefantrine or dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine) as first line treatment (Grade 1A). Quinine with doxycycline or clindamycin, or atovaquone–proguanil at appropriate doses for weight can also be used. Doxycycline should not be given to children under 12 years.19. Either an oral ACT or chloroquine can be used for the treatment of non-falciparum malaria. An oral ACT is preferred for a mixed infection, if there is uncertainty about the infecting species, or for P. vivax infection from areas where chloroquine resistance is common (Grade 1B).20. Dormant parasites (hypnozoites) persist in the liver after treatment of P. vivax or P. ovale infection: the only currently effective drug for eradication of hypnozoites is primaquine (1A). Primaquine is more effective at preventing relapse if taken at the same time as chloroquine (Grade 1C).21. Primaquine should be avoided or given with caution under expert supervision in patients with Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD), in whom it may cause severe haemolysis.22. Primaquine (for eradication of P. vivax or P. ovale hypnozoites) is contraindicated in pregnancy and when breastfeeding (until the G6PD status of child is known); after initial treatment for these infections a pregnant woman should take weekly chloroquine prophylaxis until after delivery or cessation of breastfeeding when hypnozoite eradication can be considered.23. An acute attack of malaria does not confer protection from future attacks: individuals who have had malaria should take effective anti-mosquito precautions and chemoprophylaxis during future visits to endemic areas.KeywordsMalariaTreatmentGuidelinespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesBackgroundMalaria remains one of the most common imported infections in the United Kingdom (UK). Between 1300 and 1800 malaria cases are reported each year in the UK, although reviews of reporting suggest that this may represent about 65% of all cases that occur.1 Approximately three-quarters of reported infections are due to Plasmodium falciparum and there are between 2 and 11 deaths annually. Children under 16 account for around 10% of cases.2 Two thirds of cases occur in people of African or South Asian ethnic origin and over half of the cases occur in those who had been visiting friends and family in endemic areas.3 Most patients with falciparum malaria acquire infection in Africa and malaria accounts for about 20% of travellers from Africa presenting to hospital with fever; West Africa is the commonest geographical source. Most Plasmodium vivax infections are acquired in South Asia.2, 4
This document offers guidance for the management of both uncomplicated and complicated malaria in the UK. It complements existing Public Health England (PHE) guidelines on the prevention of malaria in UK travellers. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/malaria-prevention-guidelines-for-travellers-from-the-uk. It has been based on a review of the available evidence by the PHE Advisory Committee on Malaria Prevention (ACMP), with input from other experts and expert bodies, and incorporates international guidance including WHO guidelines on treatment and definitions of severe malaria.5, 6 These guidelines will specifically present a UK perspective on management. Other non-endemic countries including the USA, Canada and Europe have also developed their own guidelines.7, 8, 9 These UK guidelines have been developed specifically for use in a non-endemic setting, but necessarily depend heavily upon evidence obtained from studies in endemic areas. More detailed information about individual drug regimens and contra-indications can be found in the British National Formulary (http://www.bnf.org/). A short summary of key points in the initial assessment and management, for use in emergency departments, is available from the British Infection Association website (http://www.britishinfection.org/).Major recommendations have been graded using a modified GRADE approach which grades both the strength of the recommendation and the level of evidence for the recommendations.A Grade 1 recommendation is a strong recommendation to do (or not do) something, where benefits clearly outweigh risks (or vice versa) for most patients.A Grade 2 recommendation is a conditional recommendation, where the risks and benefits are more closely balanced or are more uncertain.
Grade A evidence means high-quality evidence that comes from consistent results from high quality randomised controlled trials (RCTs).
Grade B evidence means moderate-quality evidence from randomised trials that suffers from flaws in conduct or design OR methodologically strong observational studies with consistent effects and exclusion of most sources of bias.
Grade C evidence is low-quality evidence from controlled trials with serious limitations or inconsistent results, or observational studies with limited evidence on effects.
Grade D evidence is based only on case studies or expert judgement or poor quality observational studies.Assessment of the patient with suspected malaria (Boxes 1 and 2)History and examination
The crucial issue in the management of malaria is consideration of the possibility of this diagnosis. Malaria should be suspected in anyone with a fever or a history of fever who has returned from or previously visited a malaria endemic area, regardless of whether they have taken prophylaxis. The minimum incubation period for naturally acquired infection is six days. Most patients with falciparum infection present in the first month or months after exposure; almost all present within six months of exposure. Vivax or ovale infections commonly present later than six months after exposure and presentation may be delayed for years. There are no specific symptoms of malaria: most patients complain of fever, headache and general malaise.10 Gastrointestinal disturbances, jaundice or respiratory symptoms occasionally occur and are often responsible for misdiagnosis. Most missed malaria infections are erroneously diagnosed as non-specific viral infections, influenza, gastroenteritis or hepatitis. Children are less likely than adults to complain of chills, arthralgia/myalgia or headaches and more likely to present with non-specific symptoms (fever, lethargy, malaise, somnolence): gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhoea) are particularly common.11, 12
Box 1Important considerations in the assessment of a patient with possible malaria.
•Malaria is a medical emergency and patients with suspected malaria should be evaluated immediately.•Symptoms of malaria are often non-specific: fever/sweats/chills, malaise, myalgia, headache, diarrhoea, and cough.•Falciparum malaria is most likely to occur within 3 months of return from an endemic area. The incubation period for malaria is at least 6 days.•Malaria caused by other species may present more than a year after return from an endemic area.•A careful exposure history is necessary: country and area of travel, including stopovers, and date of return.•Consider what malaria prophylaxis was taken (i.e. drug, dose &amp; adherence, premature cessation); appropriate prophylaxis with full adherence does not exclude malaria.•Consider other travel-related infections: e.g. typhoid, hepatitis, dengue or other arboviruses, avian influenza, MERS-CoV, HIV, meningitis/encephalitis and viral haemorrhagic fevers (VHF).18
•Three negative diagnostic samples over a period of 24–48 h are necessary to exclude malaria.
Box 2Common errors in diagnosis or management of malaria (adapted from Beeching NJ