Title: CE: Tuberculosis: A New Screening Recommendation and an Expanded Approach to Elimination in the United States.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC5651671)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5651671/

Am J NursAm J Nurs2530hhspaThe American journal of nursing0002-936X1538-7488pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleHHS Author ManuscriptsPMC5651671PMC5651671.156516715651671NIHMS9093062870423410.1097/01.NAJ.0000521946.45448.90NIHMS909306HHSPA9093061ArticleTuberculosis: A New Screening Recommendation and an Expanded Approach to Elimination in the United StatesA review of risk assessment, testing, and treatment.ParmerJohnAllenLeeannaWaltonWantaJohn Parmer and Leeanna Allen are health communication specialists, and Wanda Walton is branch chief, in the Communications, Education, and Behavioral Studies Branch, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, AtlantaContact author: John Parmer, jparmer@cdc.gov82017117830034424342809201701082018010820182410201722042026This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Nurses play a critical role in the diagnosis and treatment of tuberculosis and in the prevention of tuberculosis transmission through infection control practices. To eliminate tuberculosis in the United States, however, an expanded approach to testing and treating people with latent tuberculosis infection must be implemented. Recently, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) issued a new recommendation statement on latent tuberculosis infection testing that expands nurses’ opportunities to identify at-risk populations for tuberculosis prevention. In combination with newer testing methodologies and shorter treatment regimens, implementation of the USPSTF recommendation has the potential to remove previously existing barriers to screening and treatment of both patients and health care providers. This article provides a general overview of tuberculosis transmission, pathogenesis, and epidemiology; presents preventive care recommendations for targeted testing among high-risk groups; and discusses the USPSTF recommendation’s applicability to public health and primary care practice in the United States.latent tuberculosis infectiontuberculosistuberculosis diseasetuberculosis testingtuberculosis treatmentpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesA nurse at your clinic had been coughing for a few months, but dismissed it as seasonal allergies. The nurse’s annual tuberculosis test was positive, and after a chest X-ray, medical examination, and sputum laboratory results, the nurse was diagnosed with tuberculosis. The health department estimates that the nurse may have been infectious for two months prior, exposing patients, visitors, and staff to Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Immuno-compromised adult patients and children who had been in close contact with the nurse are of special concern to the health department. Clinic staff members are concerned about the risk of transmitting tuberculosis to their own families.Health workers from the Duval County Health Department and other Florida health agencies test homeless citizens for tuberculosis in downtown Jacksonville. Photo by Bob Mack, AP Photo /The Florida Times-Union.This fictional scenario describes one way tuberculosis can present a risk to health care workers, their families, and their patients. Tuberculosis in health care workers is not common, but still occurs too frequently in the United States. According to data from the National Tuberculosis Surveillance System, approximately 350 health care workers were diagnosed with tuberculosis in 2015, accounting for 3.9% of total cases.1 Tuberculosis transmission involving health care workers has been seen in hospitals, clinics, and long-term care facilities.2–4 The adoption of tuberculosis infection control measures has decreased the number of tuberculosis outbreaks and incidents of tuberculosis transmission to patients and health care workers. Proven tuberculosis control practices, such as infection control measures and active tuberculosis case finding and treatment, are essential elements of a tuberculosis elimination strategy. This article will discuss preventing tuberculosis disease from developing through targeted testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection to provide an even greater impact on reducing future cases of tuberculosis disease.BackgroundTuberculosis was a leading cause of death in the United States in the early 20th century. Medical and public health interventions resulted in a steady decline in cases that began in the mid-1950s and continued until the early 1990s, when a tuberculosis resurgence occurred. The resurgence was associated with the emergence of the HIV epidemic, increased immigration from countries with high tuberculosis rates, and declines in funding of tuberculosis control programs in many jurisdictions. After a major reinvestment in tuberculosis control activities at all levels of government, tuberculosis cases began to decline again in 1993. However, after two decades of decline, tuberculosis incidence in the United States has now stalled at approximately three cases per 100,000 persons. In fact, after having declined yearly from 1993 to 2014, the overall number of tuberculosis cases in the United States increased slightly in 2015, from 9,406 to 9,557.1 (See Figure 1.)Epidemiologic modeling suggests that tuberculosis elimination, defined as less than one tuberculosis case per 1 million persons per year, will not occur by the end of this century given the annual declines observed over the past two decades.5 Achieving tuberculosis elimination in the United States will require a substantial improvement in identification and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection among high-risk groups who live in this country, while at the same time continuing to focus on active tuberculosis case finding and treatment. New and expanded approaches to and partnerships for tuberculosis prevention and control are necessary to achieve this goal.1In 2016, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) issued a recommendation statement on testing asymptomatic adults ages 18 and older who are at increased risk for tuberculosis.6 This was the first USPSTF recommendation statement issued on tuberculosis testing since 1996.7 It urges health care providers to assess their patients’ risk of latent tuberculosis infection by considering the country of origin of foreign-born persons and whether patients live or have lived in high-risk congregate settings such as homeless shelters and correctional facilities. The USPSTF assigned a “B” grade to its screening recommendation, meaning that the recommended service has more potential benefits than potential harms for the population covered.6 Under the Affordable Care Act, services recommended by the USPSTF with grades of “A” or “B” should be provided with no co-pay or deductible costs for insured persons.8This new screening recommendation complements existing guidelines for latent tuberculosis infection testing, including those of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Thoracic Society.9–12 In addition to removing cost barriers, newer testing methodologies and shorter treatment regimens have the potential to remove previously existing barriers such as multiple clinic visits for testing and long months of treatment. (For recommendations from the USPSTF and the CDC, see Latent Tuberculosis Infection Screening Recommendations.)Latent Tuberculosis Infection Screening RecommendationsU.S. Preventive Services Task ForceScreening for Latent Tuberculosis Infection in AdultsForeign bornPeople who were born in, or are former residents of, countries with increased tuberculosis prevalence: http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2547762Congregate settingsPeople who live in, or have lived in, high-risk congregate settings (such as homeless shelters and correctional facilities): http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2547762Centers for Disease Control and PreventionRecommendations for Tuberculosis TestingHealth care workersGuidelines for preventing the transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in health care settings: www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5417a1.htm?s_cid=rr5417a1_ePeople exposed to someone with tuberculosis diseaseGuidelines for the investigation of contacts of persons with infectious tuberculosis: www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5415a1.htmPeople with weakened immune systemsTargeted tuberculin testing and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection: www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr4906a1.htmChildrenRecommendations for preventive pediatric health care: www.aap.org/en-us/Documents/periodicity_schedule.pdfTRANSMISSION, PATHOGENESIS, EPIDEMIOLOGYTransmissionTuberculosis is most commonly spread from person to person through the air. When a person with infectious tuberculosis disease coughs, speaks, or sings, tiny particles containing M. tuberculosis are expelled into the air.13 These particles, called droplet nuclei, are about 1 to 5 microns in diameter—less than 1/5000th of an inch. Droplet nuclei can remain suspended in the air for several hours, depending on the environment.14 If another person inhales air that contains these droplet nuclei, infection may occur; but not everyone who is exposed to a person with infectious tuberculosis disease becomes infected with M. tuberculosis. The probability that tuberculosis will be transmitted depends on patient characteristics and environmental factors. For example, a person who has tuberculosis disease of the lung or throat is most infectious when chest radiographs show cavitation, and the person doesn’t cover her or his mouth and nose when coughing. Environmental factors, such as exposure to M. tuberculosis in a small, enclosed space with recirculated air containing infectious droplet nuclei, increase the probability of transmission of M. tuberculosis.10PathogenesisWhen a person inhales air with droplets containing M. tuberculosis, most of the larger droplets become lodged in the upper respiratory tract, where infection is unlikely to develop. Infection most often occurs when smaller droplet nuclei containing tubercle bacilli reach the alveoli of the lungs. In the alveoli, most of the tubercle bacilli are killed by the immune system. However, the few remaining live bacilli can multiply and spread throughout the body via the bloodstream. Tuberculosis disease is most likely to develop in the apex of the lung, but can also occur in the kidneys, the brain, and bone. Tubercle bacilli can also spread through lymphatic channels to the lymph nodes.In people who have a healthy immune system, the body is able to stop the multiplication of the bacilli within weeks after infection, preventing further spread. At this point, the person has latent tuberculosis infection, which can be detected by a tuberculosis test two to eight weeks after infection. A person who has latent tuberculosis infection isn’t considered a case of tuberculosis and isn’t infectious—that is, she or he cannot spread the infection to others.15When the immune system can’t stop tuberculosis bacteria from growing, latent tuberculosis infection progresses to tuberculosis disease. Without treatment, approximately 5% of people with latent tuberculosis infection develop tuberculosis disease within one to two years after becoming infected. Another 5% of people with untreated latent tuberculosis infection will get sick years later, when their immune system becomes weak for another reason. Therefore, without treatment, approximately 10% of people with latent tuberculosis infection will progress to tuberculosis disease.16 For the differences between latent tuberculosis infection and tuberculosis disease, see Table 1.EpidemiologyAmong the 9,557 tuberculosis cases reported in the United States in 2015, a third (n = 3,186; 33.3%) occurred among U.S.-born persons; two-thirds (n = 6,350; 66.4%) occurred among foreign-born persons.1 Tuberculosis disease is a nationally notifiable disease: health care providers are required by law to notify state public health authorities of a case of tuberculosis disease. However, latent tuberculosis infection is not a nationally notifiable disease. Latent tuberculosis infection data collection and surveillance varies from state to state. The CDC estimates that up to 13 million people in the United States are living with latent tuberculosis infection and that more than 85% of U.S. cases of tuberculosis disease each year are the result of reactivated infection instead of recent transmission.5, 17The rest of this article will focus on improving the identification and treatment of latent tuberculosis infection among high-risk populations, including foreign-born persons living in the United States, those who live or have lived in high-risk congregate settings, and those who work in health care settings. We discuss preventive care recommendations for targeted testing among these and other high-risk groups and their applicability to U.S. public health and primary care practice.LATENT TUBERCULOSIS INFECTION RISK ASSESSMENT, TESTING, AND DIAGNOSISRisk assessmentPeople at risk for developing tuberculosis disease fall into two broad categories: those at increased risk for exposure to tuberculosis disease and those at increased risk for progression to tuberculosis disease if infected. Foreign-born persons, those who live or have lived in congregate settings, and health care workers are among those who have an increased likelihood of exposure to people with tuberculosis disease and should be tested for tuberculosis infection.10 In addition, people with clinical conditions or other factors associated with an increased risk of progression from latent tuberculosis infection to tuberculosis disease should also be tested.9 For a complete list of factors associated with increased risk of exposure to or infection with M. tuberculosis, as well as factors associated with increased risk of progression from latent tuberculosis infection to tuberculosis disease, see Tuberculosis Risk Factors.15, 18Tuberculosis Risk Factors15, 18People at high risk for exposure to or infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis include:close contacts of a person with infectious tuberculosis diseasepersons who are from, or who frequently travel to, areas of the world with high rates of tuberculosispersons who live or work in high-risk congregate settings (for example, nursing homes, homeless shelters, or correctional facilities)health care workers who serve patients who are at increased risk for tuberculosis diseasePeople at high risk for developing tuberculosis disease after infection with M. tuberculosis include:children younger than 5