Title: Statins for Primary Prevention in Those Aged 70 Years and Older: A Critical Review of Recent Cholesterol Guidelines.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC7245614)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7245614/

Drugs AgingDrugs Aging319nihpaDrugs &amp; aging1170-229X1179-1969pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC7245614PMC7245614.172456147245614NIHMS15834173104980710.1007/s40266-019-00673-wNIHMS1583417NIHPA15834171ArticleStatins for Primary Prevention in Those Aged 70 Years and Older: A Critical Review of Recent Cholesterol GuidelinesHawleyChelsea E.http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6136-818912RoefaroJohn2FormanDaniel E.34OrkabyAriela R.151New England Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA2Pharmacy Department, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA3Section of Geriatric Cardiology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA4Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA, USA5Division of Aging, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USAChelsea E. Hawley, Chelsea.Henderson@va.gov, Ariela R. Orkaby, Ariela.Orkaby@va.gov820193683582636876990305202001082020010820202505202028072024This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.The risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease rises with age and remains the leading cause of death in older adults. Evidence for the use of statins for primary prevention in older adults is limited, despite the possibility that this population may derive significant clinical benefit given its increased cardiovascular risk. Until publication of the 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol, and the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease, guidelines for statin prescription in older adults remained unchanged despite new evidence of possible benefit in older adults. In this review, we present key updates in the 2018 and 2019 guidelines and the evidence informing these updates. We compare the discordant recommendations of the seven major North American and European guidelines on cholesterol management released in the past 5 years and highlight gaps in the literature regarding primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in older adults. As most cardiovascular events in older adults are nonfatal, we ask how clinicians should weigh the risks and benefits of continuing a statin for primary prevention in older adults. We also reframe the concept of deprescribing of statins in the older population, using the Geriatrics 5Ms framework: Mind, Mobility, Medications, Multi-complexity, and what Matters Most to older adults. A recent call from the National Institute on Aging for a statin trial focusing on older adults extends from similar concerns.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1IntroductionThe risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) rises with age and remains the leading cause of death in older adults, accounting for 60% of deaths in those aged 85 years and older [1]. Statins are the cornerstone of pharmaceutical primary prevention of ASCVD and cardiac events. Thus, statin use in those aged 79 years and older has increased fourfold in the past decade [2] in relation to the rise in prevalence of ASCVD in this population [3–6]. While evidence for the use of statins for primary prevention of ASCVD in those over 75 years of age is limited [6], it is entirely possible that this age group is the most likely to benefit: increased ASCVD risk is almost inevitable with increasing age, including subclinical disease manifestations and accumulating risks of stroke or other severe primary events [7].Recently, the 2013 American Cardiology Association/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines were replaced by the 2018 American Heart Association (AHA), American College of Cardiology (ACC), American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation (AACVPR), American Association Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA), Association of Black Cardiologists (ABC), American College of Preventive Medicine (ACPM), American Diabetes Association (ADA), American Geriatrics Society (AGS), American Pharmacists Association (APhA), American Society for Preventive Cardiology (ASPC), National Lipid Association (NLA), and Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association (PCNA) Guideline on the Management of Blood Cholesterol (2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines) [8]. The updated 2018 AHA/ACC guidelines include new analyses of prospective and existing cohort data, contributing to relatively novel perspectives regarding potential benefits of statins for primary prevention in older adults [1, 2, 9–13]. Shortly thereafter, the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease added clarity related to the use of statins for primary prevention in those up to age 75 years (2019 ACC/AHA Primary Prevention Guidelines) [14].In this review, we compare the discordant recommendations of the seven major North American and European guidelines on cholesterol management released in the past 5 years, with respect to primary prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in older adults, including:
US Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense (VA/DoD, 2014) [15].UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE-UK, 2014) [16].Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS, 2016) [17].US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF, 2016) [18].European Society of Cardiology/European Atherosclerosis Society (ESC/EAS, 2016) [19].2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines [8].2019 ACC/AHA Primary Prevention Guidelines [14].While these guidelines were largely derived from the same body of evidence, recommendations for older adults are discordant, highlighting the limitations, variability and ambiguity in the existing data [3, 10, 20]. We present key updates in the 2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines [8] and 2019 ACC/AHA Primary Prevention Guidelines [14] and the evidence informing these updates. We delineate differences among the guidelines in relation to statins for primary prevention in older populations, highlighting current gaps in the literature.Given that statins are recommended for older adults to prevent debilitating cardiac events, we also explore a novel question: how should clinicians weigh the risks and benefits of continuing a statin for primary prevention in an older adult for whom a statin may have already successfully prevented a cardiac event? We reframe the concept of deprescribing statins in the older population by applying the concepts of ‘time to benefit’ and the ‘Geriatrics 5Ms framework’ (Mind, Mobility, Medications, Multi-complexity, and what Matters Most to older adults) [21]. These approaches help delineate each individual patient’s unique priorities, and facilitate the delivery of individualized care. A recent call for a statin trial focusing on older adults from the National Institute on Aging (NIA) extends from similar concerns.2Divergence in Guidelines Remains: Age Cut Points and Defining Cardiovascular (CV) Risk in Older AdultsWhile all seven major cholesterol guidelines recommend an individualized and shared approach to care, the guidelines differ on several counts. Despite being derived from the same body of evidence, the seven major cholesterol guidelines diverge in two key areas: (1) methods to estimate ASCVD risk; and (2) determination of optimal ages to discontinue statins (Table 1). Within the seven guidelines, four different ASCVD risk estimators have been applied to gauge thresholds of treatment. While these risk estimators all include age in the equation, only the QRISK2 has been validated in those aged 80 years and older (up to age 84 years) [3, 22].The age cut-offs for statin prescription in older adults without ASCVD varies by guideline, from age 65 years in the ESC/EAS guideline, to no age cut-off in the VA/DoD guideline [15, 19], as shown in Table 1. The VA/DoD guideline advocates for periodic reassessment of ASCVD risk, using a cut-off of 12% 10-year risk of a major adverse cardiac event using the Pooled Cohort Equation (PCE) or Framingham Risk Estimator (FRE) [15, 23], rather than an age cut-off. The 2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines fall in between, recommending that it is reasonable to consider initiating a moderate intensity statin for those over 75 years of age with a low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) of 70–189 mg/dL, because evidence to date, although of limited quality, points towards benefit in those over 75 years of age [8].With so much discord between the guidelines on these two critical considerations, we are left to consider the following questions. (1) Should age matter when evaluating clinical risk? (2) What tools are available to define cardiovascular (CV) risk in older adults?2.1Should Age Matter?Age is one of the strongest risk factors for CVD, incorporated into nearly all risk calculators. It is possible that older adults, regardless of age, will derive the greatest net benefit from statin therapy [3, 24–27]. Assuming that statins for primary prevention in older and younger adults have a similar efficacy, 105,000 myocardial infarction (MI) and 68,000 coronary heart disease (CHD) deaths could be prevented for those aged 75–94 years over 10 years at a cost of $25,000 per disability-adjusted life-year [1, 4].Existing ASCVD risk calculators are limited in their age range. The PCE is valid up to age 79 years, while data in those beyond age 75 years remain sparse and are an important target for future research [18, 28]. The FRE is not well-validated beyond age 75 years [17], while the ESC/EAS risk estimator (Systemic Coronary Risk Estimation [SCORE]) has not been validated in individuals over age 65 years [19]. The only tool to have included a cohort of adults over 80 years of age (QRISK2) has a maximum age of validity of 84 years. An age of 70 years or older automatically places healthy older adults at moderate risk per QRISK2 [22], rendering it no more helpful than other CVD risk calculators for this age group.We do not know whether negative functional outcomes, either real or perceived, related to statin use outweigh the benefit of statins in older adults with multimorbidity and an aging physiology as most studies were not powered to detect harm in this complex population [1]. Furthermore the potential benefits of statins in older adults with regard to stroke prevention, the development or progression of peripheral arterial disease, or the effects on cognition and frailty are unclear [3]. To address a patient’s unique risk and benefit profile from a particular statin therapy, consideration should be given in future studies to assessing their effect on the above health outcomes and the qualitative outcomes that are meaningful to older adults [1, 3].2.2How Do We Accurately Define CV Risk in Older Adults?Using most current risk estimators, adults over 75 years of age always reach risk thresholds for statin prescribing; thus, the decision to treat this population with a statin is grounded exclusively in age alone [1, 3, 24, 29]. The lack of a screening tool that discriminates risk beyond age alone highlights an important area for further research to develop a risk calculator that accounts for successful aging. Moreover, none of the existing risk estimators account for important age-related variables such as frailty, cognition, and functional status [10]. This presents a challenge as existing epidemiology suggests that age alone is a significant nonmodifiable risk factor for CVD. New tools that move beyond chronologic age, or the validation of existing tools, in older populations are needed to more accurately estimate ASCVD risk, particularly in those aged 80 years and older [1]. When validating these tools in older populations, consideration of geriatric specific concerns, such as frailty, cognition, function, falls, disability, and functional dependence, may help these estimators better predict clinical risk in older patients with complex medication conditions.Recommendations in published guidelines do not agree because of the conflicting body of evidence on which they are based. Thus, the NIA has put out a call for a statin trial in older adults. Such a trial will provide critically needed information on the role of statins for primary prevention of ASCVD in older adults, including populations with greater heterogeneity, much older age, and diabetes.3Statins for Primary Prevention in Older Adults: Current State of EvidenceThe 2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines and 2019 ACC/AHA Primary Prevention Guidelines make several key points about using statins for primary prevention of CVD in older adults. The authors of the 2018 AHA/ACC Cholesterol Guidelines note the limitations of ASCVD risk estimators for older adults and recommend stratifying individuals by ASCVD risk score, while also considering risk-enhancing factors and the potential for further lifestyle modifications to determine if the risk estimator is accurate [8]. When considering factors that contribute to CV risk in older adults, beyond age, both the 2018 and 2019 guidelines incorporated data from the BioImage Study, to recommend that coronary artery calcium (CAC) be considered in the risk discussion in addition to clinical risk via the PCE for older adults [8, 14]. The strong negative predictive value of a CAC score of zero suggests statin therapy is not likely to yield clinical benefit for CVD prevention [8].3.1Evidence Informing 2018 and 2019 Guideline UpdatesThe evidence that informed the primary prevention recommendations in the 2018 and 2019 guidelines included retrospective analyses of existing data and new analyses of prospective data, yielding different conclusions, as shown in Table 2 [1, 2, 9–13]. Of note, original data collected in the above studies spanned a wide time period, during which many changes in cholesterol guidelines were made, contributing to possible selection bias within each trial. One positive trial supporting statins for primary prevention in older adults included a meta-analysis that combined randomized controlled trial data from HOPE-3 [30] and JUPITER [31] stratified by age, which showed significant statin benefits regardless of their advanced age [13]; this analysis was limited by the small number of participants over the age of 75 years in the original trials.In contrast, a post hoc analysis of the nonblinded lipid-lowering component of the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT-LLT) stratified a group of older participants with moderate hypertension by age. The results of this analysis showed no signi