Title: Scaling Alzheimer's Care: The Case for Specialized Treatment Clinics.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC12353897)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12353897/

pmcJ Am Geriatr SocJ Am Geriatr Soc319nihpaJournal of the American Geriatrics Society0002-86141532-5415pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC12353897PMC12353897.11235389712353897NIHMS20706214019221210.1111/jgs.19461NIHMS2070621NIHPA20706211ArticleScaling Alzheimer’s Care: The Case for Specialized Treatment ClinicsVidoniEric D.PhDaParksAdam C.PhDabBrunetteAmandaPhDabKreszynKatelynnFNPbTownleyRyan A.MDabArthurAnne K.ARNP-BCabGillenLindseyAPRNbPuchaltJaime PeralesPhDaLewandowskiTinaEdDaMudaranthakamDinesh P.PhDaMorrisJill K.aSmithT. RyanMDabWoodwardJenniferMDabBurnsJeffrey M.MDaba.University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USAb.The University of Kansas Health System, Kansas City, KS, USAAuthor Contributions:
Study Concept and Design: Jeffrey M. Burns, Adam C. Parks, Amanda Brunette, Katelynn Kreszyn, Ryan A. Townley, Anne K. Arthur, Lindsay Gillen, Jill K. MorrisAcquisition of Subjects/Data: Katelynn Kreszyn, Ryan A. Townley, Anne K. Arthur, Lindsay Gillen, Dinesh Pal Mudaranthakam, Jill K. MorrisData Analysis and Interpretation: Jeffrey M. Burns, Jaime Perales Puchalt, Eric D. Vidoni, T. Ryan Smith, Jennifer Woodward, Tina Lewandowski, Dinesh Pal MudaranthakamManuscript Preparation: Jeffrey M. Burns, Adam C. Parks, Amanda Brunette, Katelynn Kreszyn, Ryan A. Townley, Anne K. Arthur, Lindsay Gillen, Jaime Perales Puchalt, Eric D. Vidoni, T. Ryan Smith, Jennifer Woodward Tina Lewandowski, Dinesh Pal Mudaranthakam, Jill K. MorrisCorresponding Author: Jeffrey M. Burns, MD, MS, Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160, Mail Stop 6002, jburns2@kumc.edu820250742025738495021254525520304202507042026070420263108202507042026This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Background:The approval of amyloid-targeting monoclonal antibodies has transformed Alzheimer’s disease (AD) treatment, shifting the field from symptomatic management to targeting the underlying pathology. These therapies require specialized care models to manage the selection, treatment, and monitoring of eligible patients.Methods:Here we describe the implementation of the Anti-Amyloid Treatment Clinic (KU-AATC) at the University of Kansas Health System, a dedicated clinic model designed to streamline access to amyloid-clearing therapies and to provide safe, efficient patient care. We detail the KU-AATC’s structured approach, including a multidisciplinary team with advanced practice providers (APPs) leading patient evaluation and shared decision-making, and tailored workflows to ensure timely access to treatment. We review data from the clinic’s first 18 months.Results:The KU-AATC model demonstrates a feasible approach to managing the complex needs of amyloid-targeting therapy for AD.Conclusions:Our findings suggest that a specialized clinic structure can support safe, accessible, and efficient care for AD patients, potentially serving as a scalable model for healthcare systems adapting to the demands of emerging AD treatments. Expanding similar clinics may address neurologist shortages and improve equitable access to advanced therapies.Alzheimer diseaseAmyloid-beta ImmunotherapyMultidisciplinary Care Modelspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesINTRODUCTIONThe landscape of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) treatment is undergoing a significant transformation with the recent approval of amyloid-targeting monoclonal antibody therapies.1,2 These treatments, including lecanemab, donanemab, and aducanumab, modify the underlying pathology of AD rather than managing symptoms.3,4 However, their approval creates an urgent need to innovate how these therapies are delivered. Traditional memory care and neurology clinics, long structured around generalized care models, are not equipped to handle an increasing number of patients who will qualify for these highly specialized and resource-intensive therapies.5–8 Scaling the current system to meet this demand is impractical without rethinking the core structure of AD care.9,10Delivering these new therapies requires much more than simply increasing clinic capacity. It demands a multidisciplinary, highly specialized team to efficiently manage the critical tasks of selecting appropriate patients, engaging in shared decision-making, prescribing treatments, and closely monitoring for adverse events.11 Amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA), such as microhemorrhages and cerebral edema, require ongoing MRI surveillance, adding complexity and burden to the healthcare team. The combination of these factors necessitates a dedicated clinic model, where the specialized team can manage these tasks, empowering primary care providers and other specialists to screen and facilitate early therapy or refer their patients for focused care.12,13Currently, there are few clinics across the U.S. with the infrastructure to administer these amyloid-targeting therapies. Existing reports and anecdotal evidence suggest that centralized coordination, financial sustainability assessments, and integration of electronic medical record (EMR) tools are critical for successful implementation.13 However, these reports are limited, and there is a need for more detailed descriptions of how different health care environments are adapting to this new era in AD treatment.The University of Kansas Health System (TUKHS) established its Anti-Amyloid Treatment Clinic (KU-AATC), a specialized clinic dedicated to streamlining access to amyloid-clearing therapies, in mid-2023. The goal has been to fast-track access to amyloid monoclonal antibody drugs, ensuring these are an appropriate option for patients with AD and their families, and, if so, managing the prescription and safety monitoring required to safely give the drug. The importance of fast-tracking access is the need to buffer the impact these drugs may have on clinic wait times, which has been estimated to grow to more than 4 years by 2027, mostly due to the scarcity of AD specialists and PET scanners.14 This paper aims to describe the implementation of the KU-AATC during its first year, offering insight into how focused care models can address the emerging demands of AD treatment.METHODSDescription of the Clinic:TUKHS is a comprehensive regional, academic medical center. The TUKHS Department of Neurology Memory Care Clinic has served as a tertiary referral clinic for AD and related disorders since 2004. In 2023, the Memory Care Clinic supported the care of 2,891 unique patients. With the approval of lecanemab, the Memory Care Clinic, recognized a need for creating treatment capacity to accommodate the expected demand. Others have described steps for onboarding new therapeutic models13 which are likely to vary by system. Here, we focus on the structured processes of the KU-AATC, designed to ensure efficient patient flow and comprehensive care management..Between July 2023 and January 2025, the KU-AATC has received 308 patient referrals, with 93 individuals (34%) excluded due to safety concerns or personal decisions to forgo treatment. An additional 73 patients remain in various stages of evaluation or treatment decision-making. Of those pursuing therapy, 130 patients have initiated the treatment process, including 100 actively receiving therapy and 22 awaiting treatment initiation. Figure 1 provides a complete CONSORT-style diagram of patients in each stage of evaluation and treatment. Data were collected under a quality assurance project approval (KUMC Institutional Review Board) and may not be generalizable to other clinical experiences.Clinic Team:The (KU-AATC) clinical team is currently composed of a board-certified neurologist, an advanced practice provider (APP), a neuropsychologist, a psychometrist, two nurses, and a clinic manager, each contributing varying levels of effort to the clinic’s operations (see Table 1). The neurologist provides overall clinic oversight, supervises patient care, manages e-consults, and oversees the treatment of adverse events. The APP, trained in dementia evaluation and appropriate use guidelines for monoclonal antibody therapy, serves as the clinical backbone of the clinic, performing initial evaluations, assessing eligibility, guiding shared decision-making, and monitoring patient safety. A neuropsychologist provides oversight for cognitive testing, when necessary, and interprets the test battery, while a psychometrist administers these tests under the neuropsychologist’s supervision. The clinic manager ensures efficient operations by overseeing staffing and administrative tasks. Finally, nurses play a crucial role in providing navigation services and coordinating patient care, including visit scheduling, planning and tracking infusions and surveillance MRIs, and managing data entry for the CMS Registry.Referral Process:Patients are referred by primary care physicians, geriatricians, and general neurologists, both within and outside TUKHS. Table 2 provides a general descriptive overview of participants evaluated and treated in the KU-AATC clinic. Any referrals to the Memory Care Clinic, of which the KU-AATC is part, require that we have clinical notes from the referring physician detailing the nature of the cognitive issues and that the clinician has completed at minimum bedside cognitive testing or more in depth neuropsychological testing. We also require that an MRI have been completed in the last year and the referral is accompanied by the MRI report. In the initial months of the clinic, we experiemented with requiring confirmation of cerebral amyloid and ApoE testing but this proved to be a major barrier given the referring providers’ difficulty ordering these tests and with reimbursement issues.Initial Visit and Workup:Patients and their families attend an initial consultation with the APP. This visit includes a comprehensive discussion of anti-amyloid therapies, covering risks, benefits, and the treatment logistics. The APP uses a standardized handout to structure this conversation (Supplemental File 1), addressing treatment expectations, potential benefits, potential costs, risk evaluation, and potential burdens. The APP reviews for inclusion and exclusion criteria in line with appropriate use guidelines.15 The visit is documented using a standardized template in the medical record (Supplemental File 2).During the initial consultation, the APP orders any remaining diagnostic procedures to assist with determining eligibility for anti-amyloid therapy, including cognitive testing, MRI with heme sensitive sequences, lumbar puncture or amyloid PET to confirm the presence of cerebral amyloid, and APOE genotyping. Lumbar puncture for AD biomarker testing is currently preferred (to acquire information on both amyloid and tau levels) though PET imaging is also used based on patient preference or when lumbar puncture results are indeterminate. The APP schedules a follow up appointment in 1 to 3 months to review the results and discuss treatment options. The nurse navigators track the completion of these remaing tests and as needed help coordinate these by working with patients to ensure they are completed prior to the follow up visit.Neuropsychological Testing:If cognitive testing is incomplete to assess the stage (i.e. MCI or mild dementia), we have developed a streamlined process for more in depth neuropsychological testing. Traditional neuropsychological evaluations often lead to delays in care due to extended wait times, which can postpone treatment for Alzheimer’s patients by several months. To address this issue, an abbreviated cognitive testing visit was developed. The visit employs brief cognitive testing, including the Short Test of Mental Status (STMS)16 and the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS),17 to efficiently evaluate cognitive functioning and establish a baseline. To assess current symptoms and functional status, questionnaires including the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ)18 and Everyday Cognition Questionnaire19 are completed by the patient’s family member or care provider while the patient is testing. This streamlined approach significantly reduces wait times for patients, which would otherwise be delayed by referral for full neuropsychological assessment. This procedure was also designed to be repeatable with longitudinal follow-up for continuous monitoring of cognitive status as well as outcomes measurement. It should also be noted that the cognitive testing visit often coincides with the initial visit, depending on provider availability, in order to reduce travel demands on patients.Follow-up Visit:After completing all diagnostic procedures, the patient returns for a follow-up visit with the APP. During this visit, test results and treatment options are reviewed in a shared decision-making process, considering both eligibility and whether the therapy aligns with the patient’s goals. The APP, patient, and care partners discuss the benefits, risks, treatment burden, and time commitment, setting realistic expectations. A candid discussion of personal factors—such as risk tolerance, lifestyle, and financial considerations—helps guide the decision. If anti-amyloid therapy is chosen, enrollment in the CMS registry is initiated.e-Consult:When a patient opts to proceed with therapy, the APP submits an electronic consultation (e-Consult) to the clinic medical director for review. An e-Consult is an asynchronous, interprofessional communication that allows specialists to provide clinical guidance without requiring a face-to-face visit. This consultation system ensures that the supervising physician assesses diagnostic data and evaluates treatment risks and benefits, which maintains the quality of care while allowing the medical director to focus on complex cases. This model streamlines physician oversight without necessitating direct patient contact for each case, thus optimizing care coordination.Treatment Initiation:Once the medical director approves the evaluation and treatment orders, the nurse navigator creates a schedule of infusions and intervening surveillance MRI scans at appropriate intervals. The nurse navigator works with the infusion center to secure prior authorization and registers the patient in the mandatory CMS registry, entering all requisite information, including required data such as the initial cognitive test (in our case the STMS) and FAQ scores.Our team coordinates with TUKHS Infusion Center and, more recently outside infusion centers, to ensure the initial infusions include an