Title: Comparing the Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan With Federal Cancer Prevention and Control Recommendations.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC4591619)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/4591619/

pmcPrev Chronic DisPrev Chronic Dis245prevchrondPCDPreventing Chronic Disease1545-1151Centers for Disease Control and PreventionPMC4591619PMC4591619.1459161945916192642586710.5888/pcd12.15000815_00081Original ResearchPeer ReviewedComparing the Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan With Federal Cancer Prevention and Control RecommendationsFowlerStephanie L.PhDMPHPlatzElizabeth A.ScDMPHDiener-WestMariePhDHokenmaierSarahMPATrussMeredithMPPLewisCourtneyMPHCHESKanarekNorma F.PhDAuthor Affiliations: Elizabeth A. Platz, Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland; Marie Diener-West, Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Sarah Hokenmaier, Meredith Truss, Courtney Lewis, Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Center for Cancer Prevention and Control, Baltimore, Maryland; Norma F. Kanarek, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, and the Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland.Corresponding Author: Stephanie L. Fowler, PhD, MPH, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 9609 Medical Center Dr, RM 3E-542, Bethesda, MD 20892-9712. Telephone: 240-276-6662. Email: stephanie.fowler@nih.gov.20150110201512247478E163010120150810201525012022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is a publication of the U.S. Government. This publication is in the public domain and is therefore without copyright. All text from this work may be reprinted freely. Use of these materials should be properly cited.IntroductionSince the introduction of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2012, 11 million more Americans now have access to preventive services via health care coverage. Several prevention-related recommendations issued by the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) are covered under the ACA. State cancer plans often provide prevention strategies, but whether these strategies correspond to federal evidence-based recommendations is unclear. The objective of this article is to assess whether federal evidence-based recommendations, including those covered under the ACA, are included in the Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan (MCCCP).MethodsA total of 19 federal recommendations pertaining to cancer prevention and control were identified. Inclusion of federal cancer-related recommendations by USPSTF, CDC, and ACIP in the MCCCP’s goals, objectives, and strategies was examined.ResultsNine of the federal recommendations were issued after the MCCCP’s publication. MCCCP recommendations corresponded completely with 4 federal recommendations and corresponded only partially with 3. Reasons for partial correspondence included specification of less restrictive at-risk populations or different intervention implementers. Three federal recommendations were not mentioned in the MCCCP’s goals, objectives, and strategies.ConclusionMany cancer-related federal recommendations were released after the MCCCP’s publication and therefore do not appear in the most current version. We recommend that the results of this analysis be considered in the update of the MCCCP. Our findings underscore the need for a periodic scan for changes to federal recommendations and for adjusting state policies and programs to correspond with federal recommendations, as appropriate for Marylanders.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYIntroductionThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) funds all 50 states through the National Comprehensive Cancer Control Program (NCCCP) to develop and implement comprehensive cancer control plans (1). There is no standard national cancer plan; instead, state cancer plans vary on the basis of content and organization, depending on a host of factors including state priorities, political climate, and stakeholder involvement and partnership. Furthermore, cancer plans are not static but are updated and revised on an ongoing basis. For example, Maryland revises its plan every 3 to 5 years (2). According to CDC, one goal of comprehensive cancer control planning is to disseminate and implement best practices and evidence-based strategies (1). The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), CDC, and Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) all issue cancer-related evidence-based recommendations (3–5). USPSTF’s grade A and B recommendations and many of CDC’s and ACIP’s recommendations and guidelines are covered under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (3–5). To our knowledge, there has not been an assessment of any state cancer plan examining the extent to which these recommendations are included. The first Maryland cancer plan was written in 1991 and has been updated several times since. The most recent plan, published in 2011, was developed by more than 200 contributors including representatives from hospitals, academia, nongovernmental organizations, and government, as well as citizens. Contributors formed committees to write specific chapters in the Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan (MCCCP). The process included an extensive review of evidence-based recommendations from multiple sources that were published when the plan was being developed. Recommendations from reputable sources such as USPSTF, CDC, the American Cancer Society, and many others relevant to the specific topic area were reviewed and considered by the MCCCP contributors. In addition, other recently published Maryland health plans were reviewed to achieve a cohesive approach to the development of goals, objectives, and strategies. MCCCP contributors used these recommendations, Maryland-specific data, and the expertise of many local physicians, academicians, public health practitioners, community health workers, cancer survivors, and others to determine the final goals, objectives, and strategies to be included in the MCCCP.The 15-chapter plan focuses on primary, secondary, and tertiary cancer prevention and control and includes cross-cutting surveillance and health disparities sections. Priorities for overcoming the issues described in the MCCCP are presented at the end of each chapter in the form of goals, objectives, and strategies (2), all of which are actionable activities that can be implemented by professionals working in the field of cancer prevention and control. The purpose of this investigation was to compare the goals, objectives, and strategies in the Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan (MCCCP) (2) with the cancer-related, evidence-based recommendations of federal agencies that are covered under the ACA. We examined the extent to which cancer-related USPSTF recommendations (grade A and B only), ACIP recommendations, and CDC guidelines were included in the 2011 MCCCP’s goals, objectives, and strategies. The goal of this assessment is to inform future updates of the MCCCP and to provide a model for other state cancer plans.MethodsWe reviewed recommendations issued by the USPSTF, ACIP, and CDC. The rationale for using these authoritative bodies was their extensive reliance on evidence-based medicine in addition to their cancer-related recommendations covered under the ACA. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (6) and the National Cancer Institute (7) websites refer to USPSTF recommendations, which supports our selection of the USPSTF. USPSTF and ACIP recommendations and CDC guidelines are updated periodically. Nineteen cancer prevention and control-related recommendations or guidelines released by May 31, 2014 were included in our assessment (Table).TableCorrespondence Between 19 Federal Evidence-Based Recommendations and Guidelinesa for Primary and Secondary Cancer Prevention and Control and Recommendations in the 2011 Maryland Comprehensive Cancer Control Plan (MCCCP)MCCCP Published Before RecommendationsClinicians provide counseling about minimizing exposure to ultraviolet radiation to reduce risk for skin cancer, aged 10 to 24 years with fair skin. (USPSTF Grade B; issued May 2012)Screening all adults for obesity. Clinicians should offer or refer patients with a body mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or higher to intensive, multicomponent behavioral interventions. (USPSTF Grade B; issued June 2012)Annual screening for lung cancer with low-dose computed tomography in adults aged 55 to 80 years who have a 30 pack-year smoking history and currently smoke or have quit within the past 15 years. Screening should be discontinued once a person has not smoked for 15 years or develops a health problem that substantially limits life expectancy or the ability or willingness to have curative lung surgery. (USPSTF Grade B; issued December 2013)Primary care providers screen women who have family members with breast, ovarian, tubal, or peritoneal cancer with one of several screening tools designed to identify a family history that may be associated with an increased risk for potentially harmful mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes (BRCA1 or BRCA2). Women with positive screening results should receive genetic counseling and, if indicated after counseling, BRCA testing. (USPSTF Grade B; issued December 2013)Clinicians engage in shared, informed decision-making with women who are at increased risk for breast cancer about medications to reduce their risk. For women who are at increased risk for breast cancer and at low risk for adverse medication effects, clinicians should offer to prescribe risk-reducing medications, such as tamoxifen or raloxifene. (USPSTF Grade B; issued September 2013)Screening for cervical cancer in women aged 21 to 65 years with cytology (Pap smear) every 3 years or, for women aged 30 to 65 years who want to lengthen the screening interval, screening with a combination of cytology and human papillomavirus (HPV) testing every 5 years. (USPSTF Grade A; issued March 2012)Screening for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in persons at high risk for infection. Recommended one-time screening for HCV infection to adults born between 1945 and 1965. (USPSTF Grade B; issued June 2013)Screening for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection in persons at high risk for infection. (USPSTF Grade B; issued May 2014)Clinicians screen adults aged 18 years or older for alcohol misuse and provide persons engaged in risky or hazardous drinking with brief behavioral counseling interventions to reduce alcohol misuse. (USPSTF Grade B; issued May 2013)
Complete Correspondence
Promote and support breastfeeding. (USPSTF Grade B; issued October 2008)Screening mammography for women, with or without clinical breast examination, every 1 to 2 years for women age 40 years or older. (USPSTF Grade B; issued September, 2002)Proper levels of physical activity: 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 min) of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (ie, brisk walking) every week and weight training muscle-strengthening activities on 2 or more days a week that work all major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms). OR1 Hour and 15 minutes (75 min) of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity (ie, jogging or running) every week and weight training muscle-strengthening activities on 2 or more days per week that work all major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms).ORAn equivalent mix of moderate- and vigorous-intensity aerobic activity and weight training muscle-strengthening activities on 2 or more days per week that work all major muscle groups (legs, hips, back, abdomen, chest, shoulders, and arms). (CDC; issued in 2008)Routine vaccination of HPV2 and HPV4 of females aged 11 or 12 years, and catch-up vaccination for females aged 13 through 26 yearsb. (ACIP; issued March 2007)
Partial Correspondence: Less Restrictive At-Risk Population in MCCCP
Screening for colorectal cancer using fecal occult blood testing (FOBT), sigmoidoscopy, or colonoscopy, in adults, beginning at age 50 years and continuing until age 75 years. (USPSTF Grade A; issued October 2008)MCCCP recommends screening for those 50 or older per ACS/Multi-Society Taskforce guidelinesc.
Partial Correspondence: Different Implementer
Clinicians ask all adults about tobacco use and provide tobacco cessation interventions for those who use tobacco products. (USPSTF Grade A; issued April 2009)MCCCP states hospitals should adopt inpatient counseling and treatment of tobacco-using patientsc.Clinicians ask all pregnant women about tobacco use and provide augmented pregnancy-tailored counseling to those who smoke. (USPSTF Grade A; issued April 2009)MCCCP states hospitals should adopt inpatient counseling and treatment of tobacco-using patientsc.
No Mention in Goals, Objectives, and Strategies
Screening for HBV infection in pregnant women at their first prenatal visit. (USPSTF Grade A; issued June 2009)Intensive behavioral dietary counseling . . . diet-related chronic disease. Intensive counseling can be delivered by primary care clinicians or by referral to other specialists, such as nutritionists or dietitiansd. (USPSTF Grade B; issued January 2003)According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, moderate alcohol consumption is defined as having up to 1 drink per day for women and up to 2 drinks per day for mene. (CDC; issued in 2010)Abbreviations: ACIP, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; ACS, American Cancer Society; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Pap, Papanicolaou; USPSTF, US Preventive Services Task Force.a Federal primary and secondary cancer prevention and control recommendations and guidelines from the USPSTF (3), CDC (4), and ACIP (5).b MCCCP does not include specific age range, but refers to “guideline-eligible” populations.c Explanation for MCCCP classification.d USPSTF recommendation is specific to people with risk factors for cardiovascular disease.e Appears in MCCCP text but not in the goals, objectives, and strategies.For this analysis, we selected federal recommendations or guidelines pertaining to cancer prevention and control for adults. Because tobacco use, physical inactivity, obesity, and alcohol misuse increase the risk of developing cancer (8,9), we included in our analysis recommendations and guidelines pertaining to these behaviors and conditions. We identified 16 USPSTF recommendations (3) concerning breastfeeding, dietary counseling, risk reduction and genetic screening for women at high risk for breast cancer, early cancer detection screening, obesity, tobacco use cessation, diet, alcohol use