Title: Discovery, mechanisms of action and combination therapy of artemisinin.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC2778258)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2778258/

Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther319nihpaExpert review of anti-infective therapy1478-72101744-8336pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC2778258PMC2778258.127782582778258NIHMS1550921980370810.1586/eri.09.68NIHMS155092NIHPA1550921ArticleDiscovery, mechanisms of action and combination therapy of artemisininCuiLiwangDepartment of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, 537 ASI Building, University Park, PA 16802, USA, Tel.: +1 814 863 7663, Fax: +1 814 865 3048, luc2@psu.edu†SuXin-zhuanLaboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA, Tel.: +1 301 402 0876, Fax: +1 301 402 2201, xsu@niaid.nih.gov
†Author for correspondence Department of Entomology, Pennsylvania State University, 537 ASI Building, University Park, PA 16802, USA, Tel.: +1 814 863 7663, Fax: +1 814 865 3048, luc2@psu.edu1020097818287199910132910200901082010010820101811200906062024This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Despite great international efforts, malaria still inflicts an enormous toll on human lives, especially in Africa. Throughout history, antimalarial medicines have been one of the most powerful tools in malaria control. However, the acquisition and spread of parasite strains that are resistant to multiple antimalarial drugs have become one of the greatest challenges to malaria treatment, and are associated with the increase in morbidity and mortality in many malaria-endemic countries. To deal with this grave situation, artemisinin-based combinatory therapies (ACTs) have been introduced and widely deployed in malarious regions. Artemisinin is a new class of antimalarial compounds discovered by Chinese scientists from the sweet wormwood Artemisia annua. The potential development of resistance to artemisinins by Plasmodium falciparum threatens the usable lifespan of ACTs, and therefore is a subject of close surveillance and extensive research. Studies at the Thai–Cambodian border, a historical epicenter of multidrug resistance, have detected reduced susceptibility to artemisinins as manifested by prolonged parasite-clearance times, raising considerable concerns on resistance development. Despite this significance, there is still controversy on the mode of action of artemisinins. Although a number of potential cellular targets of artemisinins have been proposed, they remain to be verified experimentally. Here, we review the history of artemisinin discovery, discuss the mode of action and potential drug targets, and present strategies to elucidate resistance mechanisms.antimalarial drugsartemisinin-based combinatory therapydrug-resistant malariaPlasmodiumpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesDespite intensive international efforts, malaria still affects approximately 5% of the world's population. According to the World Malaria Report 2008 [201], the estimated annual incidence for 2006 was 250 million cases, resulting in approximately 900,000 deaths, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. Malaria eradication is once again on the agenda of the world community [1]; a Global Malaria Action Plan recently announced at the United Nations seeks to eradicate malaria using integrated approaches including vaccines, bed-net distribution, indoor spraying and improved drug treatments of the disease [202]. A major factor that severely hinders the efforts to ‘roll-back malaria’ is the emergence and spread of parasites resistant to affordable antimalarial agents [2]. The situation is particularly grave in southeast Asia, where the prevalence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) parasites has become a great challenge for malaria management. In this region, Plasmodium falciparum parasites are resistant to many drugs commonly used to treat malaria, leading to major change in the treatment policies of the WHO in 2006 [203]. Since then, the WHO has advocated a policy of artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) for treating P. falciparum. With funding from the Global Fund, ACT has been adopted in 67 malaria-endemic countries, including 41 in Africa, as the first-line treatment for all falciparum malaria [3].Brief history of artemisinin discoveryThe discovery of artemisinin for malaria therapy by Chinese scientists in the 1970s was one of the greatest discoveries in medicine in the 20th Century [4]; however, the history of its discovery has been a mystery and even controversial. While this subject has been discussed in several reviews [5–8], a recently published book entitled A Detailed Chronological Record of Project 523 and the Discovery and Development of Qinghaosu (Artemisinin), edited by Jianfang Zhang and six other scientists who participated in the project, provides a more detailed account [9]. The book addresses the debates on who should be credited for the discovery of artemisinin and suggests that the discovery, production and clinical trials of artemisinin were the results of work from approximately 600 Chinese scientists. The apparent delays in the report of such a major discovery and its associated studies might be attributed to several factors. First, the work leading to the discovery of artemisinin was initially a secret military project. Second, a culture of not encouraging publications of scientific data in Western journals dominated academia in China, particularly during the ‘Cultural Revolution’ (1966–1976). Finally, limited skills in English communication might have also played a role. Indeed, a large number of papers on artemisinin and related subjects have been published in Chinese journals.The project leading to the discovery of artemisinin was initiated in response to a request from North Vietnamese leaders suffering heavy losses of soldiers due to malaria during the Vietnam War. Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou called for an urgent effort to find solutions. A meeting discussing action plans was held on 23 May 1967 (thus named ‘Project 523’), which laid out long- and short-term goals for developing antimalarial therapies. The long-term goal was to discover new effective antimalarial drugs. Because soldiers were dying from malaria, effective antimalarial drugs were also needed in the battlefield immediately. Drug combinations using pyrimethamine and dapsone (pill No. 1 for 7-day prophylaxis), pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine (pill No. 2 for 10 days), and sulfadoxine and piperaquine phosphate (pill No. 3 for 30 days) were developed and tested in the battlefield. These drugs were effective and provided immediate relief of the malaria problem for the army. Meanwhile, a large-scale, multi-institute search for novel antimalarial drugs was launched under the leadership of the National Steering Group. A 3-year plan was finalized at the meeting, focusing on three major directions:Development of additional combination therapiesSurvey and collection of private recipes or treatment practices among endemic populationsChemical synthesis and screeningParticipating teams also included those specialized in clinical trials and insect repellent development. Screening of the traditional Chinese pharmacopoeia soon led to the identification of more than ten plants with good antimalarial activities, including yingzhao (Artabotrys hexapetalus) and qinghao (Artemisia annua).There are interesting stories on how qinghaosu (artemisinin) was extracted from Artemisia plants, used by Chinese herbalists for thousands of years as a remedy for many illnesses. The earliest record, written on a piece of silk unearthed from the Mawangdui Han Dynasty tombs (168 BC), described it as a treatment for hemorrhoids. Later, in the Handbook of Prescriptions for Emergency Treatments by Ge Hong (283–343) during the Jin Dynasty and in Compendium of Materia Medica by Li Shizhen (1518–1593) during the Ming Dynasty, qinghao was specifically described as a remedy for fever. The use of qinghao to treat malaria was extensively practiced in some rural areas of China when Project 523 was launched. After testing some 100 recipes of various herbs prepared using different methods including boiling and ethanol extraction, it was realized that some preparations from Artemisia plants had activities against rodent malaria with an efficacy of 60–80%, but the activities were inconsistent and unstable. Inspired by reading Ge Hong's recipe: “Take one bunch of qinghao, soak in two sheng (∼0.4 l) of water, wring it out to obtain the juice and ingest it in its entirety” [10], scientists, including Youyou Tu from the Institute of Traditional Medicine in Beijing who was credited with the discovery of artemisinin by some people, decided to use ether to extract the active ingredient at low temperature. The resultant ether extract improved efficacy against rodent malaria to nearly 100%. The results suggest that active ingredients are heat labile. These conditions are in line with local practices in some Chinese rural regions, where indigenous people simply ingest fresh Artemisia plants with brown sugar when they have malaria infections. Mild extraction conditions used in these practices are very different from the common practices of preparing Chinese herbal medicine, which normally use dried plants that often require an extended period of boiling. The current Chinese pharmacopoeia specifies a daily dose of 4.5–9 g of dried A. annua herb to be prepared as a tea infusion with boiling water for the treatment of fever and malaria. Although artemisinin itself is poorly soluble in water, the presence of other plant constituents may improve the water solubility of artemisinin. A recent study revealed that 1 l of such traditional preparation from 9 g of dried herb contained 94.5 mg of artemisinin, and ingestion of this decoction resulted in a maximum plasma concentration of artemisinin of 240 ng/ml [11], which may explain the clinical effect of Artemisia preparations for malaria treatment in ancient China. While monotherapy with the tea preparation is not recommended as a treatment option for malaria, such traditional Artemisia decoctions have been shown to result in a quick resolution of parasitemia and clinical symptoms when used to treat uncomplicated falciparum malaria [12,13].With the report of a positive effect of crude Artemisia extract against rodent malaria at a meeting held in March 1972, the tasks of finalizing extraction methods, performing further efficacy and safety tests, clinical trials, and isolating the active ingredients were assigned to the Institute of Traditional Medicine in Beijing [9]. A clinical trial of the crude extract involving 30 cases of malaria (20 Plasmodium vivax cases, nine P. falciparum cases and one mixed infection) was conducted between August and October in 1972. The average fever clearance time using neutral ether extracts was approximately 19 h for P. vivax and approximately 36 h for P. falciparum, although recrudescence was observed in some patients. These results provided key data showing effectiveness of Artemisia extracts in treating malaria and the foundation for subsequent investigations. The next step was to isolate the active ingredients, and a preparation termed qinghaosu II that showed some antimalarial activity was isolated at the Institute of Traditional Medicine in Beijing in 1972. Unfortunately, the first human trial of eight cases using this preparation did not achieve expected results, with only two cases being cured after 3 weeks and two cases with some side effects. At the same time, laboratories in Shandong and Yunnan provinces also obtained extracts from A. annua, and their clinical trials produced very encouraging results. A trial on 30 P. vivax cases in Shandong with six pills containing 17.1 g of dry aerial part of A. annua each achieved better results than chloroquine, with excellent efficacy and fast relief of clinical symptoms. In 1973, scientists at the Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica (China) and Shandong Institute of Traditional Medicine and Materia Medica (China) extracted the antimalarial crystalline principle from A. annua and named it ‘huanghaosu’ or ‘huanghuahaosu’, respectively, which was later renamed qinghaosu (artemisinin). Animal trials on rodent malaria parasites with the crystals achieved excellent results in efficacy, toxicity and safety [9].Two meetings were held in early 1974 to share and exchange information obtained from different teams and to plan for future work [9]. It was clear to the scientists at that time that they were working with the same active ingredient(s) and that it appeared to be active in killing both P. falciparum and P. vivax. Considering the experience in clinical trials and access to established field sites, the leadership decided to send the artemisinin crystals from Yunnan Institute of Materia Medica to Professor Guoqiao Li at Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine (China), whose group was conducting clinical trials at that time. Clinical trials in Yunnan on 18 malaria cases (14 P. falciparum cases including four severe cases and four P. vivax cases) produced excellent results. Later in 1975, the relative configuration of artemisinin was solved using x-ray crystal analysis, while the absolute configuration was obtained using anomalous diffraction x-ray crystal analysis in 1976 and was published in 1979 [9]. The structure of artemisinin provided further foundation for improvement of the drug. Several derivatives were subsequently produced in China to treat malaria, including artemether and artesunate in 1987, and dihydroartemisinin (DHA) in 1992. Extension of Project 523 also led to the discovery of several synthetic antimalarial drugs including pyronaridine in 1973, lumefantrine (benflumetol) in 1976 and naphthoquine in 1986, some of which are currently used as partner drugs in ACTs. While the greatest impact of the discovery of artemisinin on medicine is on malaria therapy, artemisinin also possesses activities against many other parasites, cancers and viruses [14].As early as in the 1980s, scientists from the Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, and Chinese Academy of Military Medical Sciences began to investigate ways to reduce recrudescence associated with artemisinin monotherapy and to prevent or slow down potential resistance development to artemisinin and its derivatives. Since the three antimalarial pills developed earlier in China are all combination drugs, initial efforts have been focused on such a strategy. From the drugs showing synergistic effects with artemisinins, lumefantrine was selected as a partner drug for artemether, and they were reg