Title: Selection of the highly replicative and partially multidrug resistant rtS78T HBV polymerase mutation during TDF-ETV combination therapy.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC6016549)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6016549/

J HepatolJ. Hepatol.319nihpaJournal of hepatology0168-82781600-0641pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC6016549PMC6016549.160165496016549NIHMS9704142839223410.1016/j.jhep.2017.03.027NIHMS970414NIHPA9704141ArticleSelection of the highly replicative and partially multidrug resistant rtS78T HBV polymerase mutation during TDF-ETV combination therapyShirvani-DastgerdiElham12WinerBenjamin Y.2Celià-TerrassaToni2KangYibin2TaberneroDavid34YagmurEray5Rodríguez-FríasFrancisco34GregoriJosep6LueddeTom1TrautweinChristian1PlossAlexander2TackeFrank1
1Department of Medicine III, RWTH-University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany
2Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain
4Liver Unit, Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain
5Medical Care Centre, Dr Stein and Colleagues, Mönchengladbach, Germany
6Roche Diagnostics SL, Sant Cugat del Vallès, SpainCorresponding author: Frank Tacke, MD, PhD, Department of Medicine III, RWTH-University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany. frank.tacke@gmx.net0742017820176723158002462543005201801082018010820182606201825062024This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Background &amp; AimsPatients chronically infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) that are on long-term treatment with nucleoside or nucleotide analogues are at risk of selecting HBV strains with complex mutational patterns. We herein report two cases of HBV-infected patients with insufficient viral suppression despite dual antiviral therapy with entecavir (ETV) and tenofovir (TDF), of which one patient died from aggressive hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).MethodsSerum samples of the patients from different time-points were analyzed by ultra-deep pyrosequencing analysis. Identified HBV mutations were functionally analyzed after transient transfection of replication-competent HBV vectors into hepatoma cells in vitro. We assessed replication efficacy, resistance to antivirals and potential impact on HBV secretion (viral particles, exosomes).ResultsSequencing analyses revealed the selection of the rtS78T HBV polymerase mutation in both cases that simultaneously creates a premature stop codon at sC69 and thereby deletes almost the entire small HBV surface protein. One of the patients had an additional 261-bp deletion in the preS1/S2 region. Functional analyses of the mutations in vitro revealed that the rtS78T/sC69* mutation, but not the preS1/S2 deletion, significantly enhanced viral replication and conferred reduced susceptibility to ETV and TDF. The sC69* mutation caused truncation of HBs protein, leading to impaired detection by commercial HBsAg assay, without causing intracellular HBsAg retention or affecting HBV secretion.ConclusionsThe rtS78T/c69* HBV mutation associated with enhanced replication and insufficient response to antiviral treatment may favor long-term persistence of these isolates. Along with increased production of HBV transcripts and the sustained secretion of viral particles in the absence of antigenic domains of S protein, this HBV mutation may predispose to carcinogenic effects.Graphical abstract
HBVdrug resistanceHCCmutationsHBsAgexosomepmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesIntroductionOver 240 million people are chronically infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) worldwide. Despite advances in vaccination and treatment, HBV-related deaths due to liver cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) have increased between 1990 and 2013 globally by 33% to &gt;686,000 cases in 2013 [1]. Therefore, the main treatment goal for chronic hepatitis B is to suppress viral replication and consequently to prevent progression of the disease [2]. In most cases, this is achieved by the orally available nucleos(t)ide analogues that act as competitive inhibitors of the HBV reverse transcriptase, as their incorporation into the DNA strand provokes chain termination and hence suppresses HBV replication. One of the major problems with using nucleos(t)ide analogues has been the development of drug resistance mutations during long term therapy [3]. Factors that determine the risk of selecting antiviral therapy-resistant mutants include pre-treatment HBV DNA level, the choice of the antiviral (with a low/high barrier to resistance), the duration of treatment, the on-treatment response to antivirals as well as prior exposure to nucleos(t)ide analogues [3].In order to reduce the risk of drug resistance, all guidelines now recommend the use of highly potent antivirals with a high barrier to resistance such as entecavir (ETV) or tenofovir (TDF) [4]. If ETV is used as first-line therapy (without prior lamivudine (LAM) exposure), the rate of resistance is very low, approximately 1% or less after 5 years of therapy [5]. The molecular explanation is that ETV resistance usually requires the LAM-resistant “YMDD mutation(s)” (rtM204V/I ±L180M) plus an additional ETV ‘signature’ substitution in the B domain (rtI169T or rtS184G), C domain (rtS202G/I), or E domain (rtM250V) [3]. Moreover, these ETV-resistance mutations in the HBV genome drastically reduce viral replication when compared to wildtype HBV in vitro [6]. In case of TDF, no signature mutation for TDF resistance has been identified in prospective patient cohorts to date even after seven years of therapy [7], although cases of insufficient responses to TDF have been reported [8,9]. Notably, mutations in the HBV polymerase-open reading frame (P-ORF) related to drug resistance may alter the amino acid sequence of the surface antigen proteins (S), because of the overlapping reading frames of the P and S gene [10].We herein report two patient cases with insufficient responses to dual TDF and ETV treatment. Molecular analyses revealed the presence of the rtS78T mutation that created a stop codon (sC69*) for HBsAg. Functional analyses indicated that this mutation affect viral replication and susceptibility to ETV/TDF, thereby providing novel molecular insights into high-risk mutational patterns of HBV during long-term antiviral treatment.Materials &amp; MethodsPatient samples and sequencingWe identified the two HBV-infected patients with insufficient response to antiviral therapy from our outpatient clinic (University Hospital Aachen, Germany). Serum samples from two time-points each were subjected to ultra-deep pyrosequencing [11] and direct PCR analyses. Information regarding the primer sequences can be found in the Supplementary CTAT Table.Plasmid construction and in vitro analysesTo investigate the effects of rtS78T/sC69* and preS1/preS2del mutations on replication of HBV, three replication-competent HBV constructs containing the rtS78T/sC69* mutation (M1), the preS1/S2 deletion (preS1/preS2del, M2) with an in frame deletion of the nucleotides 1124 to 1385 as well as the combination of the two, rtS78T/sC69* + preS1/S2del (M3), were generated using site directed mutagenesis and recombination techniques [12]. Human hepatoma Huh7 cells were transiently transfected with the replication-competent HBV plasmid constructs, as described previously [13]. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and HBeAg were measured in the supernatant by commercially available kits (Modular Analytics E170, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). The values were normalized to the beta-Gal transfection efficiency.HBV-DNA isolation and qPCRHBV progeny DNA from transfected cells and HBV-DNA from secreted particles were isolated and analyzed to evaluate viral replication, as previously described [12–14]. In brief, cells were lysed seven days after transfection. HBV-capsids were then immunoprecipitated by polyclonal rabbit anti-hepatitis B core antibody (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA) and protein-A agarose beads (Roche). HBV progeny DNA was extracted subsequently through alcohol precipitation. To isolate HBV DNA from secreted particles, three different approaches were applied: (a) polyethylene glycol precipitation (PEG, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), followed by capsid digestion and alcohol precipitation of DNA; (b) immune precipitation of released particles by using preS1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA) and core (Thermo Fisher, USA) antibodies and isolation of the DNA (QIAamp DNA mini kit, Qiagen, USA); (c) ultra-centrifugation of the supernatants (110,000x g, 70 min) [15], evaluation of the concentration of pelleted particles using the LM10 nanoparticle characterization system in real-time (NanoSight, Malvern Instruments) equipped with a blue laser (405 nm) followed by isolation of exosomes from precipitated particles by using an Exosome-Human CD63 isolation/detection reagent (Thermo Fisher) and extraction of DNA (QIAamp DNA mini kit). A 5 μl aliquot of HBV DNA isolated from immunoprecipitated particles (using preS1 and core antibodies) and exosomes was subjected per reaction well to qPCR analysis, using the iTaq Universal SYBR Green One-Step qPCR kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA). The information about primer and probe sequences are provided in the Supplementary CTAT Table.Southern blot analysis of HBV DNAIsolated DNAs from cells (through immunoprecipitation of the capsids) and supernatants (through PEG precipitation) were transferred to positively charged nylon membranes (Roche) after running on 1% agarose gel via capillary transfer method and subsequently detected using random primed DIG-labeled HBV DNA probe (DIG High Prime DNA labeling and detection starter kit II, Roche). Data were quantified by ImageJ software and normalized to total protein content of the cell lysate (for progeny DNA only) and beta-Gal transfection efficiency (for both).HBV-RNA extraction and northern blot analysisTotal RNA was isolated from Huh7 cells three days after transfection with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were run on a 1.2% formaldehyde gel, transferred to a nylon membrane via capillary transfer method and labeled with a full-length DIG-labeled HBV-DNA (Roche). Quantification of data was done with ImageJ software, and results were normalized to ribosomal RNA (rRNA) content of the cell lysate (for cellular RNA) and beta-Gal transfection efficiency.Flow cytometry analysisHuh7 cells were collected 6 days post transfection and fixed with fixation buffer (1% FBS, 4% PFA in PBS) followed by staining with anti-pre-S1 (Santa Cruz, Dallas, Texas, USA), -pre-S2 and –core (Thermo Fisher) as primary antibodies and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 647 (Thermo Fisher) as the secondary antibody. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using an LSRII Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed using FlowJo software.Antiviral compounds and drug susceptibility analysisETV was purchased from Moravek Biochemicals, Brea, CA, USA, and TDF was provided by Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA. To calculate the susceptibility of HBV to antiviral drugs, Huh7 cells transfected with HBV constructs were cultured in the presence of different concentrations of ETV or TDF, followed by southern blot assay of extracted HBV progeny DNA. Southern blot assay results were normalized to the total protein content of the cell lysate and transfection efficiency based on beta-galactosidase activity. The concentration of the antiviral component resulting in the inhibition of HBV replication by 50% was considered the 50% effective concentration (EC50) [16].StatisticsStatistical analyses of experimental data were conducted using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA). Experimental results are reported as mean ± standard deviation. One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test was applied for comparisons between the groups; a P-value of &lt;0.05 was considered statistically significant.ResultsTwo patients with insufficient response to antiviral therapyPatient AA 53-year-old Caucasian man with chronic HBeAg negative HBV infection presented to our outpatient clinic in August 2009 with a baseline HBV viral load of 6×105 copies/ml (Fig. 1A, left panel). During the initial work-up, liver biopsy revealed grade 2 inflammation and stage 1 fibrosis, but simultaneously a 3.4 cm hepatic nodule in segment IV suspicious of HCC. The HCC was histologically confirmed and resected completely (R0). TDF therapy was started immediately, which resulted in reduction of HBV DNA to undetectable levels (&lt;34 copies/ml) by qPCR analysis for 21 months. The patient was regularly (3-6 months) followed for HBV suppression and HCC surveillance. About 2.5 years later (March 2012), HBV viral load increased (Fig. 1A, left panel) without detection of HCC nodules at that time. ETV was added to TDF, but was insufficient in suppressing HBV replication. About three months later (June 2012), recurrent HCC was diagnosed, resulting in hemihepatectomy of the right liver lobe. Unfortunately, HCC was multifocal upon histological processing with invasion of blood vessels and portal vein thrombosis. Notably, non-tumorous liver tissue revealed no cirrhosis (inflammation grade 1, fibrosis stage 1-2). Due to another HCC recurrence, sorafenib was started in March 2013, but the patient passed away of advanced tumor disease in April 2013. HBV DNA remained positive at low levels during ETV/TDF combination therapy (Fig. 1A, left panel). Serum samples of the patient were collected and analysed at two time points after increase of HBV viral load during TDF therapy (30 and 37 months after initiation of TDF).Patient BA 41-year-old Asian woman with chronic HBeAg positive HBV infection and a high viral load (baseline 2x109 copies/ml) presented to our outpatient clinic in January 2008. Liver biopsy revealed moderate signs of inflammation (grade 1-2) and early fibrosis (stage 1), while ALT levels were repeatedly measured above the upper limit of normal (Fig. 1A, right panel). Thus, the patient was started with ETV. Notably, viral load only slowly declined during ETV therapy (e.g., 850 copies/ml at 18 months after treatment). In November 2009, an increase in viral load by about 1-log was noted, which prompted the addition of TDF to the ETV therapy. However, even dual antiviral therapy never fully suppressed HBV DNA levels in this patient (Fig. 1A, right panel). This patient did not display evidence for HCC on regular follow-up by ultrasound. Serum samples were collected and analysed at months 48 and 57 after ETV treatment. In 2013, the patient stopped both drugs at her own decision. Her viral loads remain high due to cessation of treatment.Selection of the rtS78T and sC69