Title: Strategies for establishing policy, environmental, and systems-level interventions for managing high blood pressure and high cholesterol in health care settings: a qualitative case study.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC2483567)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2483567/

pmcPrev Chronic DisPrev Chronic Dis245prevchrondPreventing Chronic Disease1545-1151Centers for Disease Control and PreventionPMC2483567PMC2483567.12483567248356718558033PCDv53_07_02181Original ResearchPeer ReviewedStrategies for Establishing Policy, Environmental, and Systems-Level Interventions for Managing High Blood Pressure and High Cholesterol in Health Care Settings: A Qualitative Case StudyMatson KoffmanDyannDrPH, MPHCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotiondfm1@cdc.gov4770 Buford Hwy, NE, Mailstop K-47, Atlanta, GA 30341770-488-8002GranadeSharon AMPHCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Preparedness, Detection, and Control of Infectious Diseases, Atlanta, GeorgiaAnwuriVictoria VMPHRobert Wood Johnson Foundation Diabetes Initiative National Program Office, St. Louis, Missouri. At the time of this study, Ms Anwuri was affiliated with the Association of Schools of Public Health and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Atlanta, Georgia72008156200853169597A830107200806082008040420242008https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is a publication of the U.S. Government. This publication is in the public domain and is therefore without copyright. All text from this work may be reprinted freely. Use of these materials should be properly cited.IntroductionPolicy, environmental, and systems-level interventions are part of a comprehensive approach to managing high blood pressure and high cholesterol, which are key risk factors for heart disease and stroke. In this qualitative case study, we identified clinical practices in health care organizations that used policy, environmental, or systems-level interventions to improve patient outcomes for these conditions. Our 4 objectives were to describe 1) policy, environmental, and systems-level interventions; 2) enabling factors and barriers that affected implementation; 3) methods for evaluating the success of the intervention; and 4) lessons learned from the health care practices that implemented these interventions.MethodsThrough literature review and expert guidance, we identified 34 health care practices that used policy, environmental, and systems-level interventions to manage high blood pressure and high cholesterol. In 2003, we conducted case study interviews with key informants for 9 health care practices that 1) demonstrated improved patient outcomes for blood pressure or cholesterol; 2) implemented the interventions for at least 1 year; and 3) remained committed to sustaining or institutionalizing interventions. We taped and transcribed the interviews and used Centers for Disease Control and Prevention EZ-Text software (www.cdc.gov/hiv/software/ez-text.htm) to code, categorize, and analyze the responses.ResultsThe health care practices we studied implemented specialized lipid clinics, disease management programs, physician reminder systems, and participation in the Health Resources and Services Administration's Bureau of Primary Care Health Disparities Collaboratives. All practices used comprehensive systems for patient care that were well-defined, measurable, and linked to desirable patient outcomes. Most relied on data systems to identify patients targeted for the interventions and practice areas that needed improvement, and to track the progress of patients and practitioners in meeting goals. Factors contributing to success included support for patient self-management, interventions integrated into the practice's daily work flow to make implementation easier for staff, leadership and staff commitment, and community involvement.ConclusionComprehensive policy, environmental, and systems-level interventions for patient care can be effective in controlling chronic conditions such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYIntroductionCoronary heart disease and stroke are the first and third leading causes of death in the United States (1) and major causes of disability (1,2). The American Heart Association and the American Stroke Association estimate that the total direct and indirect cost of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in the United States in 2007 was $438 billion (2). Much of the burden of heart disease and stroke could be eliminated by preventing or reducing 7 major risk factors — high blood pressure, high cholesterol, obesity, tobacco use, diabetes, physical inactivity, and poor diet (3,4). For example, a reduction in systolic blood pressure of 12 to 13 mm Hg over 4 years of follow-up can reduce heart attacks by 21%, strokes by 37%, and all deaths from coronary vascular disease by 25% (5). Furthermore, a 10% decrease in total cholesterol may reduce the incidence of coronary heart disease by as much as 30% (6,7). However, only an estimated 31% of adults with high blood pressure (8) and 18% of those with high cholesterol (9) have these conditions under control. The 2004 estimated prevalence of high blood pressure at or above 140/90 mm Hg in U.S. adults aged 20 and older was 33.6%, and total cholesterol at or above 200 mg/dL was 48.4% (2). The Healthy People 2010 targets are to reduce the proportion of adults with high blood pressure to 16% and to lower the proportion of adults with elevated total cholesterol to 17% (10).Why is it such a challenge to prevent and control high blood pressure and high cholesterol? The literature cites many reasons (11-15). Some articles focus on patient-related factors, such as noncompliance with treatment regimens because of medication side effects, complexity of the drug regimen(s), and lack of awareness of the need for long-term therapy (11-13). Others focus on the failure of physicians to consistently comply with evidence-based guidelines (14). According to Wagner, Austin, and Von Korff, clinical practices are not structured to adequately care for patients with chronic conditions (15):Medical practices, especially those in primary care, are generally organized to respond to the acute and urgent needs of their patients, or symptom-relieving treatments. . . . This leaves little time or intellectual energy for addressing the less urgent, but nevertheless predictable, needs of patients with chronic illness in managing their conditions and preventing deleterious sequelae.Policy, environmental, and systems-level (PES) interventions constitute a paradigm shift in clinical care from earlier health care models and represent an ecological model that links PES changes with behavior changes at the individual level to prevent heart disease and stroke (16-18). Policy interventions include laws, regulations, and formal and informal rules adopted within specific organizations (19). For example, health care organizations can have treatment policies to implement evidence-based national clinical guidelines such as those of the Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7) (20); the Third Report of the Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (ATP III Final Report) (21); and the 2002 update to the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines (22) and the 2001 update to the  AHA/American College of Cardiology guidelines (23).Environmental interventions are changes to the economic, social, or physical environments (19). Examples include making community resources available and known to the public and creating an environment that allows people to make healthier choices.Systems-level interventions are changes affecting the way an organizational system operates. Within the health care setting, these interventions generally focus on changing the ways in which health services are delivered and may include delegating responsibility for key care functions to nonphysician members of the health care practice, putting systems in place to ensure appropriate follow-up with patients, and providing regular feedback to physicians on how well they manage their patients' conditions (24).A 1996 literature review (15) examined comprehensive approaches to reorganizing the delivery of care to improve the outcomes of patients with chronic illness. The review’s authors noted that successful interventions shared the following elements: 1) explicit protocols based on evidence-based guidelines; 2) practice organization to meet the needs of patients who require more time, a broad array of resources, and closer follow-up; 3) systematic attention to providing patients with information for behavioral change; 4) ready access to necessary expertise; and 5) supportive information systems (15). These elements, which also could be considered PES interventions, are reflected in Edward H. Wagner’s Chronic Care Model (25). This model for improving the care of patients with chronic disease has essential elements grouped in 6 areas: 1) the community (resources and policies), 2) the health care system (organization of health care), 3) support for patient self-management, 4) design for delivering health services to patients, 5) support for physician decisions, and 6) clinical information systems.In a 1997 review of interventions to prevent cardiopulmonary disorders among patients in health care settings, Ockene et al (26) concluded that traditional education and training programs for health care providers combined with reminders systems, feedback to providers, and practice guidelines are most effective for delivering preventive interventions. They also found that the effectiveness of providers is optimized when the intervention uses a team of both nonphysicians and physicians to counsel patients on prevention and when providers support the control of risk factors through multiple patient visits, follow-up telephone calls to the patient, or referrals to specialists as appropriate.We have identified other promising quasi-experimental or experimental studies published from 1997 through 2007 describing interventions in health care settings that contribute to preventing and controlling high blood pressure, high cholesterol, heart disease, and stroke (14,20-23,27-72). Elements of interventions that showed improvement in outcomes for high blood pressure or high cholesterol included 1) providers that adhere to standardized protocols that are consistent with evidence-based national guidelines (20-23,28-44); 2) multidisciplinary clinical care teams that deliver elements of quality patient care, such as routine and consistent screening, assessment, counseling, and patient follow-up contacts, to control risk factors (32,33,38,45-48); 3) treatment and prevention clinics that deliver focused management of care (31,33-37,49-54); 4) electronic medical record systems, automatic prescription systems, and paper and electronic reminder systems for health care providers (14,55-63); and 5) patient education (61,62,65-71). National treatment guidelines recommend that clinical prevention and treatment services include these 5 elements (54,55,58,59,63,64,68,71).Purpose of studyThe purpose of our case study was to identify and describe promising health care practices (PHPs) and the PES interventions these practices used to control high blood pressure and high cholesterol. We defined a PHP as one that had practice-based data showing positive outcomes from interventions to reduce risk factors related to heart disease and stroke but whose data may not yet have been tested in controlled studies to allow for generalizable results (16). We also identified the strategies that led to successful adoption and implementation of these PES interventions, the methods used to evaluate progress, and lessons learned.MethodsWe searched peer-reviewed literature databases (ABI/Inform, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Lexis/Nexis, New York, New York; OVID, New York, New York; and the National Library of Medicine’s PubMed, Bethesda, Maryland) for articles published from 1992 through 2003 to identify studies of PES interventions in health care settings that were focused on the prevention of heart disease and stroke. We also used Google (www.google.com) to identify practices implementing PES interventions that had received special recognition, such as the C. Everett Koop award for exemplary health care programs. In addition, we selected a variety of experts from among participants in national conferences and our own professional contacts, including staff from state health departments, representatives from business groups and health associations, and researchers, to identify PHPs that were using PES interventions. The search generated 644 studies of PHPs that used PES interventions. We narrowed the list to 34 studies that reported all 3 of the following: 1) data on improved patient outcomes in the control of blood pressure (&lt;140/90 mm Hg) and cholesterol (&lt;200 mg/dL for total cholesterol or &lt;100 mg/dL for low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL]), 2) incorporation of the interventions for at least 1 year, and 3) organizational commitment to sustaining or institutionalizing the interventions. We made initial phone calls to gather information if it was not publicly available and then used the following criteria to rank and select 9 of the 34 PHPs: 1) use of a control or comparison group in the study, 2) outcomes that were statistically or clinically significant, 3) incorporation of national JNC 7 (20) and ATP III (21) guidelines, and 4) study populations that were at high risk for heart disease and stroke. Using in-depth telephone interviews, we conducted a case study with key informants (physicians, other health-care practitioners, and administrators) of the 9 PHPs selected in order to identify and learn about the factors and strategies that worked for establishing the PES interventions (73). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) taped and transcribed the interviews and used CDC EZ-Text software (provided free at www.cdc.gov/hiv/software/ez-text.htm) to code, categorize, and analyze responses to the interviews.The 9 PHPs were the Laurel Health System's CVD Collaborative (Wellsboro, Pennsylvania); Health Management Corporation (Richmond, Virginia) for Blue Cross Blue Shield (BCBS) of Delaware (Wilmington, Delaware); Kaiser Permanente (Cleveland, Ohio); Mayo Clinic's Division of Community Internal Medicine (Rochester, Minnesota); Robeson Healthcare Corporation's CVD Collaborative (Lumberton, North Carolina); Midwest Heart Specialists (Chicago and Rockford, Illinois); MVP Health Care (Schenectady, New York, and Williston, Vermont); Drug Therapy Management, Inc (