Title: Management of Inpatient Elevated Blood Pressures : A Systematic Review of Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC11103512)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11103512/

pmcAnn Intern MedAnn Intern Med319nihpaAnnals of internal medicine0003-48191539-3704pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC11103512PMC11103512.3191110351211103512NIHMS19832563856090010.7326/M23-3251NIHMS1983256NIHPA1983256319ArticleManagement of Inpatient Elevated Blood Pressures: A Systematic Review of Clinical Practice GuidelinesWilsonLinnea M.MPH1HerzigShoshana J.MD, MPH12SteinmanMichael A.MD3SchonbergMara A.MD, MPH12CluettJennifer L.MD12MarcantonioEdward R.MD, SM12AndersonTimothy S.MD, MAS451Division of General Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA3Division of Geriatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA4Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA5Center for Pharmaceutical Policy and Prescribing, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PACorresponding author: Timothy S. Anderson, MD, MAS, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 3609 Forbes Avenue, 2nd Floor, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, tsander@pitt.eduAuthor Contributions: Ms. Wilson and Dr. Anderson had full access to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.42024024202417744626104975061204202402102024021020242105202426012026This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.BackgroundManagement of elevated BP during hospitalization varies widely, with many hospitalized adults experiencing blood pressures higher than those recommended for the outpatient setting.PurposeTo systematically identify guidelines on elevated BP management in the hospital.Data SourcesMEDLINE, Guideline International Network, and specialty society websites from 1 January 2010 to 29 January 2024.Study SelectionClinical practice guidelines pertaining to BP management for the adult and older adult populations for ambulatory, emergency department and inpatient settings.Data ExtractionTwo authors independently screened articles, assessed quality, and extracted data. Disagreements were resolved via consensus. Recommendations on treatment targets, preferred antihypertensive classes, and follow-up were collected for ambulatory and inpatient settings.Data SynthesisFourteen clinical practice guidelines met inclusion criteria (11 assessed as high quality per the AGREE II instrument), 11 provided broad BP management recommendations, 1 each was specific to emergency department, older adults, and hypertensive crises. No guidelines provided goals for inpatient BP or recommendations for managing asymptomatic moderately elevated BP in the hospital. Six guidelines defined hypertensive urgency as BP &gt;180/120 mm Hg, with hypertensive emergencies requiring the addition of target organ damage. Hypertensive emergency recommendations consistently included use of intravenous antihypertensives in intensive care settings. Recommendations for managing hypertensive urgencies were inconsistent, from expert consensus, and focused on the emergency department, most often advising outpatient treatment with oral medications and follow-up in days to weeks. In contrast, outpatient BP goals were clearly defined, varying between 130/80 mm Hg and 140/90 mm Hg.LimitationsExclusion of non-English guidelines and guidelines specific to sub-populations.ConclusionsDespite general consensus on outpatient BP management, guidance on inpatient BP management without symptoms is lacking, which may contribute to variable practice patterns.Primary Funding SourceNational Institute of AgingRegistrationPROSPERO: CRD42023449250pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesIntroductionHypertension is the most common chronic condition of adults in the United States, with a prevalence near 50% for adults 40-59 years old and near 75% for adults over age 65 (1, 2). Given the high proportion of adults living with hypertension, as well as its importance as a risk factor for development of cardiovascular disease (3), there are widely accepted guidelines to approach the diagnosis and management of hypertension in the ambulatory setting. Yet, many patients admitted to the hospital are found to have elevated blood pressure (BP) by those same criteria. Whether this is due to pre-existing hypertension or transient factors related to acute illness or hospitalization, it is estimated that elevated BP is present in 50-72% of inpatients (4).Management of elevated inpatient BP varies widely (5), with inconsistencies in medication routes, regimen intensification, and the prescription of new antihypertensives (4-8). Additionally, the benefits of intensive inpatient antihypertensive treatment have not been demonstrated and there are no randomized trials of inpatient BP management. Observational studies suggest 21-34% of medical inpatients receive intravenous BP medications and 9-14% of patients are discharged with intensified BP medications after non-cardiac hospitalizations (6-8). Risks of elevated BP in the inpatient setting are unknown as there are no published trials of asymptomatic inpatient BP treatment. Although at risk for confounding by indication, observational studies have found receipt of more intensive BP treatment to be associated with worse outcomes, including higher rates of acute kidney injury, stroke, and myocardial injury (6, 7, 9, 10).Given the wide variation in practice patterns and potential harms of under or overtreatment of inpatient BP, we reviewed current BP management guidelines. We sought to identify recommendations for inpatient BP goals, for management of elevated BPs in hospitalized adult and older adult populations, and for follow-up of elevated BP after hospitalization.MethodsSteps for this systematic review included: 1) searching for relevant guidelines, 2) applying exclusion criteria, 3) assessing guideline quality, 4) synthesizing guidelines. Details of the protocol for this systematic review were registered on PROSPERO [CRD42023449250].Search StrategyTo identify relevant guidelines, we searched MEDLINE via PubMed using medical subject heading of “hypertension” or “elevated blood pressure” and “management” or “therapy” and publication type of “guideline.” The same PubMed search was performed with the addition of the publication type of “systematic review” and limiting the journal search to 10 highly cited general medicine, cardiology, and hypertension journals: Annals of Internal Medicine, BMJ, Circulation, European Heart Journal, Hypertension, JAMA, JAMA Cardiology, JAMA Internal Medicine, Journal of the American College of Cardiology, Lancet, New England Journal of Medicine. Additionally, we searched the Guideline International Network library using the search terms hypertension and guidelines as well as pertinent domestic and international specialty societies. Specialty societies were decided upon through affiliation with the American Medical Association and consultation with experts. We initially ran the searches on August 01, 2023, and we updated all searches on January 29, 2024. See Supplemental Methods 1 for the full search strategy.Eligibility CriteriaWe defined guidelines as statements that include recommendations intended to optimize patient care that are informed by a review of evidence and an assessment of the benefits and harms of alternative care options (11). To be eligible, guidelines had to be published in English and include management guidelines for hypertension (Supplemental Figure 1). Guidelines that were entirely derived from an existing guideline or were published prior to 2010 were deemed ineligible. Only the most recent version of each guideline was included. We excluded guidelines specific to children or pregnant persons, and those that were specific to another care setting (e.g., long-term care facility). We included guidelines focused on ambulatory and emergency department management to assess if they included indications for hospitalizing patients for BP treatment. We excluded guidelines specific to perioperative BP management given prior reviews on this topic (12), guidelines that discussed management only in the context of other diagnoses (e.g., chronic kidney disease) or guidelines on only nonpharmacological treatment modalities (e.g., renal denervation, low-salt diets). The initial criteria and search strategy focused on recommendations tailored towards older adults given the burden of hypertension and medical complexity in this population, however given a lack of recommendations specific to older adults, the criteria and search was broadened to the general adult population. These criteria were applied to each record by two blinded reviewers (LW and TA) and any differences in screening were reconciled by consensus.Guideline Quality AssessmentTo assess the quality of included guidelines, we used the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE II) instrument (13-15). This instrument is comprised of 23 items categorized into 6 domains of Scope and Purpose, Stakeholder Involvement, Rigor of Development, Clarity of Presentation, Applicability and Editorial Independence. Each item is scored from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Each guideline was independently assessed by two reviewers (LW and TA). Scaled scores for each domain were calculated by summing the item scores for each domain, subtracting by the minimum possible score and scaling as a percentage of the maximum possible score minus the minimum possible score. Overall guideline quality was also scored from 1 (lowest possible quality) to 7 (highest possible quality) and averaged, and reviewers recorded if they would recommend the guideline for use. We classified a guideline as high quality based upon the Rigor of Development domain scaled score threshold of 60%, consistent with prior studies (16-20).Guideline Synthesis and AnalysisGuideline recommendations were extracted if they were related to: 1) when treating inpatient BP is appropriate; 2) the circumstances that result in different recommendations – specifically symptoms, age, comorbidities, and geriatric syndromes; 3) preparation for a safe transition to a post-hospitalization setting. The data extracted for the first two categories included differing target BP levels and medications recommended for different populations, and the treatment location, where applicable. Preparing for a safe transition included data on outpatient follow-up. Data for all three categories was extracted from all included guidelines. The recommendations across the guidelines included in these three categories were then summarized into tables and compared.Role of the Funding SourceThis work was funded by the NIH National Institute of Aging. The National Institutes of Health had no role in the design or conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit the manuscript for publication.ResultsWe screened 147 unique records, 14 of which were included after full text review (Table 1) (21-34). Four of the guidelines were developed by US organizations, 2 from multinational organizations, and 8 from other countries (Australia, Brazil, Canada, England, Japan, Poland, Qatar, and the United Kingdom). Eleven guidelines provided broad BP management recommendations (21, 24, 26, 34) and one was specific to older adults (23). Two guidelines covered specific clinical situations, one was specific to management of asymptomatic elevated BP in the emergency department (22) and one was specific to hypertensive crises (25). The American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) guideline addressed two questions specific to patients with asymptomatic BP in the emergency department (does screening for target organ injury reduce rates of adverse outcome and does medical intervention reduce rates of adverse outcomes) which were reviewed to be relevant to the inpatient setting (22).Guideline Quality AssessmentOverall AGREE II scores ranged from 3.0-6.5 out of 7.0 (Supplemental Table 1). The ACC/AHA (21) and VA guidelines (33) had the highest overall scores of 6.5. Individual domain scaled score ranges were: scope and purpose 50-100%, stakeholder involvement 17-97%, rigor of development 28-98%, clarity of presentation 89-100%, applicability 4-81%, editorial independence 0-92%. Eleven guidelines were rated as high quality per the Rigor of Development domain scaled score quality threshold of 60%.Eleven guidelines were based on systematic reviews and the remaining three did not clearly state what type of review was used. Nine of the guidelines specifically referenced at least one of the other guidelines included. No guidelines included systematic reviews focused on inpatient BP management decisions though three did systematically review hypertensive urgency or emergency management (22, 25, 30). Despite these methodological limitations, data from all guidelines were extracted to capture real-world practice recommendations.Guideline Synthesis and AnalysisGuidelines generally had similar recommendations regarding outpatient elevated BP management and the treatment of hypertensive emergencies, while recommendations on the management of asymptomatic inpatient elevated BP recommendations were largely absent (Table 2). Details on all data extracted can be found in Supplemental Table 2.Management of Hypertensive EmergencyTen guidelines included recommendations for management of severely elevated BP causing clinical distress, categorized as hypertensive emergencies or crises, which are inclusive of, but not specific to, the inpatient setting. Hypertensive emergencies were consistently defined by end organ damage with a BP above a threshold, most commonly &gt;180/120 mm Hg (n=6 guidelines). Guidelines consistently recommended treating hypertensive emergencies in the hospital, primarily in the intensive care unit, and with intravenous medications (Table 3). Detailed management was provided on specific hypertensive emergencies, though identified emergencies varied across the guidelines (Supplemental Table 3). BP targets and their immediacy varied by type of emergency, such as an immediate BP decrease for aortic dissection (n = 6) and a gradual BP decrease over days for malignant hypertension or acute renal failure (n =4). Only acute coronary syndrome and hypertensive encephalopathy were specified in all eleven guidelines. Amongst the guidelines mentioning hypertensive encephalopathy, four included recommendations on care, with three recommending a 20