Title: Study protocol for the targeting effective analgesia in clinics for HIV (TEACH) study - a cluster randomized controlled trial and parallel cohort to increase guideline concordant care for long-term opioid therapy among people living with HIV.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC6693587)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/6693587/

HIV Res Clin PractHIV Res Clin Pract319nihpaHIV research &amp; clinical practice2578-74892578-7470pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC6693587PMC6693587.166935876693587NIHMS15342563130314310.1080/15284336.2019.1627509NIHMS1534256NIHPA15342561ArticleStudy Protocol for the Targeting Effective Analgesia in Clinics for HIV (TEACH) Study – A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial and Parallel Cohort to Increase Guideline Concordant Care for Long-term Opioid Therapy among People Living with HIVLiraMarlene C.BA1TsuiJudith I.MD, MPH2LiebschutzJane M.MD, MPH3ColasantiJonathanMD, MSPH45RootChristinBS4ChengDebbie M.ScD6WalleyAlexander Y.MD, MSc17SullivanMegMD7ShanahanChristopherMD, MPH17O’ConnorKristenBSN1AbramsCatherineBSN4FormanLeah S.MPH8ChaissonChristineMPH8BriddenCarlyMPH, MA1PodolskyMelissa C.BA1OutlawKishnaBA4HarrisCatherine E.BS4ArmstrongWendy S.MD5del RioCarlosMD45SametJeffrey H.MD, MA, MPH1791Clinical Addiction Research and Education (CARE) Unit, Section of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA2Section of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Washington and Harborview Medical Center3Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA4Department of Global Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA5Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA6Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA7Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA8Biostatistics and Epidemiology Data Analytics Center, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA9Department of Community Health Sciences, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MACorresponding author: Jeffrey H. Samet, MD, MA, MPH, Section of General Internal Medicine, 801 Massachusetts Ave., 2nd floor, Boston, MA, 02118, 617-414-7288 (phone), 617-414-4676 (fax), jsamet@bu.edu4201920234030148632707201901042020010420201508201916112024This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.Background:People living with HIV (PLWH) frequently experience chronic pain and receive long-term opioid therapy (LTOT). Adherence to opioid prescribing guidelines among their providers is suboptimal.Objective:This paper describes the protocol of a cluster randomized trial, Targeting Effective Analgesia in Clinics for HIV (TEACH), which tested a collaborative care intervention to increase guideline-concordant care for LTOT among PLWH.Methods:HIV physicians and advanced practice providers (n=41) were recruited from September 2015 – December 2016 from two HIV clinics in Boston and Atlanta. Patients receiving LTOT from participating providers were enrolled through a waiver of informed consent (n=187). After baseline assessment, providers were randomized to the control group or the year-long TEACH intervention involving: 1) a nurse care manager and electronic registry to assist with patient management; 2) opioid education and academic detailing; and 3) facilitated access to addiction specialists. Randomization was stratified by site and LTOT patient volume. Primary outcomes (≥2 urine drug tests, early refills, provider satisfaction) were collected at 12-months. In parallel, PLWH receiving LTOT (n=170) were recruited into a longitudinal cohort at both clinics and underwent baseline and 12-month assessments. Secondary outcomes were obtained through patient self-report among participants enrolled in both the cohort and the RCT (n=117).Conclusion:TEACH will report the effects of an intervention on opioid prescribing for chronic pain on both provider and patient-level outcomes. The results may inform delivery of care for PLWH on LTOT for chronic pain at a time when opioid practices are being questioned in the US.HIVChronic PainSubstance Use DisordersLong-term Opioid TherapyPrescription Opioid MisusePain ManagementAddictionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesIntroductionAs overdose deaths in the United States have continued to rise, national attention on the opioid epidemic has led to intense scrutiny of the use of prescription opioids for chronic pain.1–5 Prescription opioids have been identified as one of the chief contributors to the epidemic,6 and thus, the risk-benefit ratio must be carefully considered when treating chronic pain with long-term opioid therapy (LTOT).7,8People living with HIV (PLWH) sit at this junction, representing a high-need group in terms of their painful comorbid conditions, and a high-risk group in terms of potential adverse outcomes related to opioids due to intersecting risk factors such as substance use.9 PLWH have higher rates of chronic pain than the general population, with estimates ranging from 39–85%,10–25 and prescription opioid rates as high as 65%.26–29 Further, these patients receive opioids at higher doses than individuals without HIV, and are more likely to be co-prescribed benzodiazepines or other sedating medications.27–32 Concomitant with the rise of prescription opioid misuse in the general population, the nonmedical use of these medications is increasingly common among PLWH.33–37 Our group recently found that among PLWH on LTOT, 43% had a high Current Opioid Misuse Measure (COMM) score, suggestive of potential opioid misuse.38,39 This is presumably related to the known co-morbidity between HIV and opioid use disorder.40,41 At the same time, pain is frequently associated with substance use,42–46 with some studies even suggesting that individuals self-medicate.47,48 Chronic pain not treated with LTOT among PLWH has been associated with increased odds of suboptimal retention in care.49 In contrast, LTOT has been associated with higher rates of virologic suppression, pointing to the potential HIV-related benefits that can occur in the context of prescribing opioids for pain.49Given the frequent coexistence of chronic pain and substance use risk in PLWH,50,51 appropriate management of pain with LTOT is complicated.HIV providers are faced with the complex and often daunting task of prescribing opioids for pain. National guidelines for prescribing LTOT exist, including those specifically for PLWH, and these guidelines can help providers make informed decisions to mitigate risks.7,52 However, adopting LTOT guidelines is challenging for HIV providers.53 They report low levels of satisfaction for pain management aspects of clinical care, as well as low confidence in their abilities to treat chronic pain.54,55 Few physicians follow standard protocol regarding assessment and may lack resources to closely monitor patients,55–60 resulting in wide variation in opioid prescribing patterns, similar to primary care.61Although an urgent need exists for interventions that can improve HIV providers’ quality of care regarding opioid pain prescribing, limited studies of such interventions have been conducted to date. None, to our knowledge, focus on opioid prescribing for PLWH.62–67 In order to address this need, we built upon the Transforming Opioid Prescribing in Primary Care (TOPCARE) intervention for use in PLWH.68,69 Liebschutz et al. found that TOPCARE improved adherence to guideline-recommended monitoring among primary care patients at a safety net hospital and affiliated community health centers.68,69 However, patient-reported outcomes were not assessed. Using TOPCARE as a model, we developed the “Targeting Effective Analgesia in Clinics for HIV” (TEACH) intervention, geared toward HIV providers, and established an observational cohort of PLWH receiving LTOT to assess provider and patient outcomes related to LTOT. This paper describes the study design and implementation.MethodsStudy objective and designWe conducted a cluster-randomized clinical trial of the TEACH collaborative care intervention at two clinics (Boston Medical Center (BMC), Boston, MA and Emory University/Grady Hospital, Atlanta, GA). In parallel, PLWH receiving LTOT (n=170) were recruited into a longitudinal cohort at both clinics and assessed at baseline and 12-months in order to collect outcomes not available in medical records. Together, the RCT and cohort enabled assessment of the following aims: Aim 1: Assess HIV providers’ adherence to LTOT guidelines8,70, as measured by occurrence of ≥2 urine drug tests (UDTs) at 12 months (primary); Aim 2: Assess patient-level outcomes, as measured by percent of patients with any early refills at 12 months (primary); Aim 3: Assess HIV providers’ satisfaction with prescribing LTOT (primary), as measured by mean satisfaction at 12 months; and Aim 4: Assess HIV disease status among patients, as measured by undetectable viral load at 12 months (exploratory) and CD4 count (exploratory). Secondary RCT outcomes were obtained via provider self-report and patient self-report among patient participants enrolled in both the RCT and the cohort (Table 1). The RCT was implemented from September 2015 through December 2017. The patient cohort was recruited and assessed between July 2015 and February 2018. The overlap of the RCT and cohort study groups is depicted in Figure 1. The TEACH study was approved by the institutional review boards at Boston University Medical Campus, Emory University and the Grady [Health System] Research Oversight Committee.Cluster randomized controlled trialParticipants and recruitmentHIV physicians and advanced practice providers were recruited from September 2015 through December 2016 from two safety-net, hospital-based HIV clinics in Boston and Atlanta. Potential provider participants and their patients were identified by queries of the electronic medical record by the Clinical Data Warehouse (CDW) at BMC and the Center For AIDS Research (CFAR) team at Emory University. Provider participant inclusion criteria included: 1) being an HIV physician or advanced practice provider (i.e., nurse practitioner or physician assistant) at the medical centers’ HIV clinics; and 2) being the main provider for ≥1 individual living with HIV who is receiving LTOT (defined as having received ≥3 opioid prescriptions ≥21 days apart within a 6-month period in the prior year). While tramadol is a schedule IV medication, reflecting a perception of less potential for abuse, it was included as a qualifying opioid for LTOT as it is an opioid. Provider participant exclusion criteria included: 1) being an investigator in this study; and 2) planning to leave the clinic &lt;9 months from screening. In total, 41 providers were identified and all enrolled in the study. Patients receiving LTOT from physician participants (n=187) were enrolled through a waiver of informed consent. The rationale for the waiver of informed consent was twofold. Because the trial was randomized at the level of the provider, it would have been logistically not possible for a provider who was receiving education, counseling, and access to a nurse care manager to selectively apply this knowledge and expertise to only certain patients. In addition, there was little risk to patients. These patient participants met the following eligibility criteria: 1) ≥18 years of age; 2) diagnosis of HIV infection from the EMR by ICD-9 codes or lab tests; 3) having received ≥3 opioid prescriptions ≥21 days apart within a 6-month period in the prior year from the study clinic site; and 4) having attended ≥1 visit to the enrollment sites within the prior 18 months. All patients who met the eligibility criteria for the clinical trial were allocated to the same treatment group (i.e., TEACH vs. control) as their provider. Study staff and clinician investigators reviewed the queried lists to confirm that those included were eligible for the study and correctly matched between patient and provider. The lists from each site were generated a second time near the end of the recruitment period to maximize the inclusion of all eligible providers and patients. Of the 187 participants enrolled into the RCT, 117 were simultaneously enrolled in the cohort (described below and Figure 1).Research staff worked with clinic leadership to identify a regularly scheduled clinic meeting at which to present the study and enroll interested providers. Providers were informed ahead of the meeting that there would be a presentation about a new research study. The research teams then introduced the study at the regularly scheduled clinic meeting and invited eligible providers to enroll. It was reinforced that they could choose not to participate or discontinue participation in the study at any time, for any reason, with no penalty. Study staff followed up individually with providers who were unable to attend the clinic meetings to enroll them into the study. Provider enrollment is outlined in Figure 2.Research assessmentsProviders completed 15-minute paper baseline and 12-month follow-up assessments, which included: demographics, training and practice characteristics, substance use among PLWH, practices for assessing and treating pain, and practices for managing use of prescribed opioids.68,71,72 At follow-up, providers randomized to the intervention group also completed a brief evaluation assessment of the intervention. To ensure completion and minimize assessment bias, research staff were present to proctor providers as they completed surveys. Providers were compensated with a $100 gift card upon completion of each assessment. The paper assessment forms were double-entered into REDCap by research staff and any data entry discrepancies were resolved.73RandomizationAfter completing a baseline assessment, providers were randomized to either the control group or the year-long TEACH intervention. Randomization was stratified by site and patient volume (1–2, 3–6, 7–11, and 12+ patients). To ensure balance with respect to the number of providers in each group, the permuted blocks strategy was used with blocks of 2. Due to the nature of the intervention, neither provider participants nor the study team members were blinded to provider group assignment.Control conditionAt the clinic meeting when the study was introduced, all providers were given an informational brochure summarizing guidelines for LTOT and listing a web resource with electronic tools (Appendix).8,68 Those who were randomized to the control group did not receive an intervention beyond the information about the study and the corresponding brochure. The control group did not have access to the support of the TEACH intervention.InterventionThe 12-month TE