Title: Essential Components of a Public Health Tuberculosis Prevention, Control, and Elimination Program: Recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association.
Source: PubMed Central (PMC7392523)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7392523/

pmcMMWR Recomm RepMMWR Recomm Rep3409mmwrrecrepRRMMWR Recommendations and Reports1057-59871545-8601Centers for Disease Control and PreventionPMC7392523PMC7392523.1739252373925233273023510.15585/mmwr.rr6907a1rr6907a11Recommendations and ReportsEssential Components of a Public Health Tuberculosis Prevention, Control, and Elimination Program: Recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the National Tuberculosis Controllers AssociationColeBarbaraMSN
1
NilsenDiana M.MD
2
WillLornaMA
3
EtkindSue C.MS
4
BurgosMarcosMD
5
ChorbaTerenceMD
6
1Riverside County Department of Public Health, Riverside, California; 2New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Long Island City, New York; 3National Tuberculosis Controllers Association, Smyrna, Georgia; 4Stop TB USA, Washington, DC; 5New Mexico Department of Health, Santa Fe, New Mexico; 6Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDCCorresponding author: Terence Chorba, MD, Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, CDC. Telephone: 404-639-0909; E-mail: tlc2@cdc.gov.31720203172020697362408127310720200708202022022026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.SummaryThis report provides an introduction and reference tool for tuberculosis (TB) controllers regarding the essential components of a public health program to prevent, control, and eliminate TB. The Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association recommendations in this report update those previously published (Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis. Essential components of a tuberculosis prevention and control program. Recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis. MMWR Recomm Rep 1995;44[No. RR-11]). The report has been written collaboratively on the basis of experience and expert opinion on approaches to organizing programs engaged in diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and surveillance for TB at state and local levels.This report reemphasizes the importance of well-established priority strategies for TB prevention and control: identification of and completion of treatment for persons with active TB disease; finding and screening persons who have had contact with TB patients; and screening, testing, and treatment of other selected persons and populations at high risk for latent TB infection (LTBI) and subsequent active TB disease.Health departments are responsible for public safety and population health. To meet their responsibilities, TB control programs should institute or ensure completion of numerous responsibilities and activities described in this report: preparing and maintaining an overall plan and policy for TB control; maintaining a surveillance system; collecting and analyzing data; participating in program evaluation and research; prioritizing TB control efforts; ensuring access to recommended laboratory and radiology tests; identifying, managing, and treating contacts and other persons at high risk for Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection; managing persons who have TB disease or who are being evaluated for TB disease; providing TB training and education; and collaborating in the coordination of patient care and other TB control activities. Descriptions of CDC-funded resources, tests for evaluation of persons with TB or LTBI, and treatment regimens for LTBI are provided (Supplementary Appendices; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BYIntroductionPurposeThis report provides an introduction and reference tool for tuberculosis (TB) controllers regarding the essential components of a public health TB program. In addition, previously published guidelines are updated to provide a national standard for the assessment of individual TB control programs (1). This report also is a guide for public health TB programs, summarizing the essential components for a public health program to prevent, control, and eliminate TB (Box 1). Updates to clinical recommendations and other information that can change rapidly are provided online (Supplementary Appendices; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289) but are not reflected in this published report.BOX 1Summary of essential components for a tuberculosis prevention, control, and elimination program: recommendations of the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis and the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association
Role of public health departments
Identify the unique role and responsibilities of the public health department in tuberculosis (TB) treatment and prevention.
Overall planning and policy components
Develop an overall TB control strategy, including written policies and procedures to provide guidance and oversight to facilities and practitioners involved in TB control.
Surveillance and reporting of persons with suspected or confirmed TB disease
Maintain a surveillance system for timely and accurate reporting of persons with suspected or confirmed TB disease.Data management, analysis, and use
Conduct routine data collection and analysis of trends within the jurisdiction of the program, and apply the results to policy, planning, and prevention efforts.
Program evaluation and quality improvement
Evaluate programs, both internally and externally, to provide guidance for improvement.
Laboratory and other testing
Maintain access to laboratory and radiology tests recommended for TB disease, drug resistance, and TB infection.
Identification, management, and treatment of persons with latent TB infection
Identify, manage, and treat contacts and selected other persons infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Identification, management, and treatment of persons with TB disease
Manage persons with suspected or confirmed TB disease as soon as possible, begin a treatment regimen, and provide case management throughout treatment.
Epidemiologic investigation
Provide a thorough and timely investigation, whether investigating a source case or conducting a contact investigation.
Training and education
Ensure the provision of training and education to TB program staff, other health departments, clinicians, patients and families, community groups, and the general public.
Partnerships and collaboration
Work with stakeholders and populations at high risk to maximize efforts and minimize expenses. TB elimination cannot be accomplished by public health programs alone.
Research
Participate in local, national, and international research, as program capacity permits.This report can be used in the following ways to optimize TB programs:To provide an introduction to TB control essentials for new TB controllers in state or local health jurisdictionsTo provide a frame of reference for policymakers and consultants for evaluating individual TB control programsTo clarify and articulate the rationale for essential program components and activities to decision-makers, whether in health departments or in the legislative arena, who allocate financial and personnel resources to TB programsTo educate colleagues or others regarding the structure and function of TB control programsRationale for and Process of Updating the 1995 GuidelinesThe recommendations in this report update those previously published regarding essential components of TB prevention and control programs (1). To update the report, a work group was formed comprising subject matter experts from the Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis (ACET), the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association (NTCA), and CDC. The report has been written collaboratively on the basis of experience and expert opinion on approaches that have succeeded in organizing programs engaged in diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and surveillance for TB at state and local levels. Each member of the work group was assigned sections to write. Regularly scheduled meetings were held to revise or review the report. The finalized report was approved by ACET, constituting authorities knowledgeable in the fields of public health, epidemiology, immunology, infectious diseases, pulmonary disease, pediatrics, tuberculosis, microbiology, and preventive health care delivery, and representation of the stakeholders, namely state, territorial, and local health departments and other federal agencies and organizations with interests in TB prevention and control.The recommendations have been updated as a result of changes in epidemiology of TB in the United States, where incidence rates decreased or plateaued during 1993–2019 (2), and changes in technologies that assist in diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and surveillance of disease. In certain jurisdictions, this progress has led to changes in the organization of and to decreased funding for TB programs, which might impede additional progress toward elimination of TB as a public health problem in the United States.In 1993, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared TB to be a global emergency, as connections between the then-emerging human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic and TB were being recognized, with persons with HIV infection having marked increases in risk for developing TB relative to those without HIV infection (3). The resulting increases in TB incidence and prevalence had global implications. By 2014, when annual TB deaths worldwide reached 1.5 million, WHO formulated an action framework, thus providing guidance toward ending the ongoing global TB epidemic, progress of low-incidence countries to preelimination by 2035, and subsequent progress in these same countries toward achieving elimination of TB as a public health problem by 2050 (4).CDC has a national strategic TB plan (5), and in 2015, the U.S. government released an action plan specifically addressing drug-resistant TB (6). This report presents the essential TB program elements needed in U.S. public health jurisdictions to maintain progress toward national and international objectives. This report also provides guidance for the increasing number of jurisdictions that, in coming years as TB epidemiology in the United States continues to evolve, will be able to transition from traditional TB control efforts to additional activities that move toward TB elimination.In 1988, the Institute of Medicine report The Future of Public Health (7) proposed a conceptual framework consisting of three core functions of public health agencies at all levels of government: assessment, policy development, and assurance. Subsequently, the Core Public Health Functions Steering Committee proposed a list of the 10 essential public health services that could be mapped to those three core functions (8). This report can be viewed within the framework of core public health functions and essential services. These lists of core functions and essential services were not formulated in a TB-specific context but rather were meant to be so general in conceptual scope that their framework could be broadly applicable to any public health problem. TB controllers might find that this core function framework provides a useful conceptual structure through which to provide initial briefings and education about the fundamentals of TB disease, TB control, and TB elimination to potential partners and decision-makers. The terminology more commonly used by TB control professionals can be usefully mapped to the core functions. Specific details regarding the core public health functions and essential services are provided (Supplementary Appendix B; https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/90289).Brief History of TB in the United StatesTB incidence in the United States has decreased considerably from the early 1950s through 2020. Although 84,304 cases were reported in the United States in 1953, only 8,920 were reported in 2019 (2). In addition, although the U.S. population doubled during those years, TB case rates decreased more than eighteenfold, from a rate of 52.6 cases per 100,000 population in 1953 to 2.7 in 2019. With global TB incidence at approximately 130 cases per 100,000 population, the United States and multiple other countries are considered to be countries with low TB incidence. However, the generally favorable long-term declining trend was interrupted in the mid-1980s and early 1990s, initially by a 5-year plateau in incidence (1984–1988), followed by a 4-year period (1989–1992) during which TB incidence increased by 14%. This resurgence of TB in the United States was attributed to factors that included all of the following (9,10):Immunosuppression: the HIV epidemic that began in the 1980sImmigration: the increasing occurrence of TB among non–U.S.-born persons from countries with a high prevalence of TBInadequate infection control: widespread transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative bacterium of TB, in congregate settings (e.g., health care facilities, correctional facilities, drug treatment centers, and homeless shelters)Reductions in funding: reductions in funding for TB programs over several decades as a result of the widespread perception that trends in TB incidence during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s indicated that TB incidence was substantially reducedResurgence of TB eventually led to increased federal funding, which along with the widespread adoption of the essential TB program components, contributed to improvements in TB prevention and control efforts. These improvements have led to decreasing TB incidence rates. Thus, when the ACET recommendations were published in 1995 (1), the principal challenge for state and local TB programs was to regain control and reverse the resurgence of TB. However, the challenge now faced by certain health jurisdictions is continuing to manage and prevent TB successfully during an era in which 1) decreasing incidence might lead to decreasing visibility and resources and 2) new approaches to diagnosis, surveillance, treatment, and prevention are needed because of the changing epidemiology of TB in the United States.In 2000, the Institute of Medicine issued the report Ending Neglect: The Elimination of Tuberculosis in the United States (11), which outlined a strategy that included the following six goals:Maintain disease controlAccelerate the decrease in incidenceDevelop new prevention, control, and treatment toolsAddress global TB incidenceMobilize and sustain public health supportTrack elimination progressThe strategies are still relevant and