Title: Promoting influenza vaccination: insights from a qualitative meta-analysis of 14 years of influenza-related communications research by U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Source: PubMed Central (PMC5856146)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/5856146/

VaccineVaccine2530hhspaVaccine0264-410X1873-2518pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleHHS Author ManuscriptsPMC5856146PMC5856146.158561465856146NIHMS9278022593672610.1016/j.vaccine.2015.04.064NIHMS927802HHSPA9278021ArticlePromoting influenza vaccination: Insights from a qualitative meta-analysis of 14 years of influenza-related communications research by U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)NowakGlen J.a*SheedyKristinebBurseyKellicSmithTeresa M.bBasketMichelleb
aCenter for Health and Risk Communication, Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication, University of Georgia, 120 Hooper St, Athens, GA 30602, USA
bCenters for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Disease, 1600 Clifton Road, MS X-AA, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA
cOakridge Institute for Science and Education, PO Box 117, MS-10, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 706 583 8268; fax: +1 706 542 2183. gnowak@uga.edu (G.J. Nowak)2842015046201533243085652741275612032018160320181603201817042026This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.IntroductionA primary mission of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) is promoting immunization against seasonal influenza. As with most education efforts, CDCs influenza-related communications are often informed by formative research.MethodsA qualitative meta-analysis of 29 unpublished, primarily qualitative CDC-sponsored studies related to flu and flu vaccination knowledge, attitudes and beliefs (KABs). The studies, undertaken between 2000 and 2013, involved focus groups, in-depth interviews, message testing and surveys. Some involved health care professionals, while others involved members of the public, including sub-populations at risk for severe illness.FindingsThe themes that emerged suggested progress in terms of KABs related to influenza and influenza vaccination, but also the persistence of many barriers to vaccine acceptance. With respect to the public, recurring themes included limited understanding of influenza and immunization recommendations, indications of greater sub-group recognition of the value of flu vaccination, continued resistance to vaccination among many, and overestimation of the effectiveness of non-vaccine measures. Seven cognitive facilitators of vaccination were identified in the studies along with six cognitive barriers. For health care providers, the analysis suggests greater knowledge and more favorable beliefs, but many misperceptions persist and are similar to those held by the public. KABs often differed by type or category of health care provider.ConclusionsThe themes identified in this qualitative analysis illustrate the difficulty in changing KABs related to influenza and influenza vaccine, particularly on the scope and scale needed to greatly improve uptake. Even with an influenza pandemic and more vaccine options available, public and some health care provider perceptions and beliefs are difficult and slow to change. This meta-analysis does, however, provide important insights from previously unpublished information that can help those who are promoting influenza vaccination to health care providers, the general public and specific populations within the general population.InfluenzaHealth communicationInfluenza vaccinationInfluenza knowledge, Attitudes and beliefs (KABs)Communication researchVaccine promotionpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessnopmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes1. IntroductionIncreasing the number of people vaccinated each year against seasonal influenza is a goal of many public and private health programs in the United States and a growing number of countries [1–5]. In the United States, seasonal influenza is a disease that causes substantial illness, hospitalizations and deaths every year [5–8], and leads to death from other causes, such as pneumonia or congestive heart failure [7,8]. Seasonal influenza places adults aged 65 years old and older, children, pregnant women, and persons of any age who have chronic medical conditions like asthma, diabetes and obesity at higher risk for serious illness and death [5,8]. The economic impact of influenza is also substantial, with one national study estimating the annual economic cost of seasonal influenza in the United States to be $87.1 billion, including $10.4 billion in direct medical costs [8].Annual influenza vaccination is the most effective way to prevent influenza and its complications, and as such, the past decade has seen the U.S. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) greatly broaden flu immunization recommendations. Since the 2010–2011 influenza season, ACIP and CDC have recommended that all persons 6 months old and older, unless medically contraindicated, should receive annual vaccination with the most up-to-date influenza strains [5]. Before 2010, only persons 50 years old and older, pregnant women, persons aged 18–49 years with medical conditions that place them at high risk for influenza complications, health-care personnel (HCP), and children aged 6 months–17 years were recommended for annual vaccination [5,9]. Illustrating the importance of expanding the number of people who receive an annual influenza vaccination, the U.S. Healthy People 2020 goals call for 70 percent flu vaccine uptake among children 6 months to 17 years, 70 percent among adults 18 and older, and 90 percent for HCP [1].The broadening of influenza vaccination recommendations, greater public health recognition of the value of seasonal vaccination to pandemic influenza preparedness and response (e.g., the 2009 H1N1 response suggested higher seasonal flu vaccination rates may foster pandemic flu vaccination acceptance), and more concerted efforts to increase both HCP vaccination and flu vaccination efforts, have fostered some increases in influenza vaccination coverage in the U.S. A compilation of influenza vaccination coverage studies done over the course of 2007–2008 to 2011–2012 flu seasons, for instance, found modest to large increases in most groups [10]. Influenza vaccination coverage among children 6 months to 17 years old increased from 31.1 percent in the 2007–2008 season to 56.7 percent in the 2011–2012 season while coverage during that period among adults 18 years old and older increased from 33 percent to 38.3 percent. Coverage among HCP was around 62–67 percent in 2011–2012 compared to around 48 percent in 2007–2008 [10]. Most recently, seasonal flu vaccination coverage estimates from the 2013–2014 season found 42.2 percent of adults 18 years old and older were vaccinated, with the rate among 6 month to 17 year-old children being 58.9 percent [11]. Overall, however, influenza vaccination rates in the United States are substantially below the Healthy People 2020 goals.Achieving compliance with influenza vaccination recommendations and ultimately, higher influenza coverage requires more than expanding the recommendations. Adequate vaccine supplies, timely distribution, easy access to vaccine and health care provider involvement are critical. A strong infrastructure, in turn, usually also requires effective influenza vaccination promotion and communication, including messaging that takes into account the knowledge, concerns and beliefs of both targeted population(s) and the health care professionals counted on to recommend and provide the vaccinations—with the goal in both cases being to foster favorable attitudes and intentions [12–15]. Messages and materials that are not informed or guided by audience or population research not only decrease the likelihood of success, they can dissuade people from taking recommended actions. At the U.S. CDC, the Health Communication Science Office (HCSO) in the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD) is responsible for developing influenza vaccination-related communications, messages and materials—with those efforts designed to educate HCPs, assist HCP in patient education efforts, and persuade people in targeted groups to get an annual influenza vaccination.For over a decade, NCIRD's HCSO has undertaken a variety of formative communication research-related projects with members of a number of different public population groups as well as with HCPs to inform its influenza vaccination promotion, communication and messaging efforts. This research has been essential given the ever-changing flu vaccine environment—which in the past decade has included vaccine shortages and delays, evolving and expanding recommendations, a pandemic, the occasional publication and publicizing of low flu vaccine efficacy estimates in seasons where there is a weak match between vaccine strain(s) and circulating strains, and a growing number of flu vaccine options, including nasal spray, intradermal, cell-based, high-dose, and quadrivalent formulations. Focus group discussions, in-depth interviews (IDIs), message testing and surveys have been used to learn more about how different groups perceive influenza and influenza vaccines, and to identify knowledge, attitude and beliefs associated with obtaining and not obtaining a seasonal influenza vaccination.The value of communication-related research goes far beyond campaigns. Communication research can inform and strengthen: (1) how the benefits, value, and risk of recommended vaccinations are framed or presented to those people the recommendation encompasses [16,17]; (2) the messaging and messages used to inform people about a vaccine or immunization recommendation, including those provided to the public, HCPs and the media [18]; (3) patient and parent immunization education materials, including those provided or found in physician offices [17]; (4) how providers address parent or patient questions and concerns related to vaccines and vaccinations [19,20]; and (5) other actions, steps or policies that may need to be considered to overcome barriers to providing (e.g., by physicians) or accepting a recommended vaccination (e.g., by members of a targeted population) [18,21]. Thus, even if a formal education or promotion campaign is not used as a strategy to increase vaccination uptake, the insights and understandings gained from communications research have significant value for many of the major components of immunization programs and efforts.A number of recently published systematic reviews and meta-analyses illustrate both the value of communications-related research and ways in which insights into the KAB's of health care provider and consumer/public population groups are applied to influenza vaccination promotion. McDonald et al. used a systematic review of 22 published studies from seven European countries to identify effective practices in promotional communications (i.e., any message delivered through any channel with the intent to encourage or promote vaccination) [22]. While their review did not directly assess the impact of promotional communications on public acceptance of influenza vaccination, they found evidence that personalizing communications and having supportive health care workers could foster improved influenza vaccination uptake [22]. With respect to health care workers, Vasilevska, Ku and Fisman's [23] systematic review and meta-analysis of 37 studies – 25 of which involved seasonal influenza vaccination – found several beliefs that appeared to be consistent predictors of vaccine acceptance. Health care workers were more willing to accept vaccination if they believed the vaccines were safe, would protect them and their families, and would not cause the disease they meant to protect against. The latter was a particular concern for influenza vaccines.Wheelock, Thomson and Sevdalis [24] focused exclusively on seasonal influenza vaccination in their effort to identify social and psychological factors underlying adult vaccination. Their review of published studies involving seasonal flu vaccination in the U.S. and the U.K. identified eight themes – primarily categories of beliefs – that were linked to seasonal influenza vaccination uptake or refusal [24]. They found recommendations from health care professionals, close relatives or friends; perceived susceptibility to influenza; and perceived effectiveness of the vaccine were three primary facilitators of seasonal flu vaccination, while lack of awareness of the recommendation, belief that vaccine was ineffective or could cause influenza, and not perceiving influenza as a health threat inhibited vaccination. They also found the KABs of health care professionals were often similar to those of the public. Finally, a recently published systematic review of 21 studies involving pregnant women and influenza (including 13 involving influenza A/H1N1 pandemic vaccination), identified lack of awareness of the recommendation, underestimation of the threat posed by seasonal flu, and concerns related to vaccine safety as KABs linked to vaccination uptake or refusal [25]. The study also found HCPs' recommendations fostered uptake but many did not recommend the vaccine to their pregnant patients.Along with highlighting the value of systematic reviews of studies involving KABs and/or communication research, the examples above illustrate the value of doing such an assessment of the NCIRD HCSO unpublished communication research-related studies. McDonald et al., for instance, noted that the current evidence base for effective promotional communications is “fragmented and incomplete,” with more information needed to inform messages and messaging [22]. They also noted that there are few published studies designed to obtain information that could provide the basis for evidence-based communication. Similarly, Yuen and Tarrant [25] noted that the “gray literature” (i.e., unpublished research studies) may have value for those seeking to increase seasonal influenza vaccination among targeted groups but such studies are often difficult to find or access. Thus, an important feature of this study is that it brings forth information and insights from a relatively large “gray literature” database.2. MethodsThe qualitative meta-analysis undertaken sought to accomplish three objectives: (1) to make available the key findings from a “grey literature” of 29 unpublished seasonal influenza vaccination communications research-related studies conducted over a 14-year span by the Health Communication Science Office in CDC's NCIRD; (2) to characterize the key KAB-related themes and findings from those studies, which included an influenza pandemic, expanded vaccination recommendations, and increased/new influenza vaccine